The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 26

Of Distribution, as Affected by Exchange

    1. We have now completed, as far as is compatible with our
purposes and limits, the exposition of the machinery through
which the produce of a country is apportioned among the different
classes of its inhabitants; which is no other than the machinery
of Exchange, and has for the exponents of its operation, the laws
of Value and of Price. We shall now avail ourselves of the light
thus acquired, to cast a retrospective glance at the subject of
Distribution. The division of the produce among the three
classes, Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when considered
without any reference to Exchange, appeared to depend on certain
general laws. It is fit that we should now consider whether these
same laws still operate, when the distribution takes place
through the complex mechanism of exchange and money; or whether
the properties of the mechanism interfere with and modify the
presiding principles. 
    The primary division of the produce of human exertion and
frugality is, as we have seen, into three shares, wages, profits,
and rent; and these shares are portioned out to the persons
entitled to them, in the form of money, and by a process of
exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with whom in the usual
arrangements of society the produce remains, pays in money, to
the other two sharers, the market value of their labour and land.
If we examine, on what the pecuniary value of labour, and the
pecuniary value of the use of land, depend, we shall find that it
is on the very same causes by which we found that wages and rent
would be regulated if there were no money and no exchange of
commodities. 
    It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is
not affected by the existence or non-existence of Exchange or
Money. Wages depend on the ratio between population and capital;
and would do so if all the capital in the world were the property
of one association, or if the capitalists among whom it is shared
maintained each an establishment for the production of every
article consumed in the community, exchange of commodities having
no existence. As the ratio between capital and population, in all
old countries, depends on the strength of the checks by which the
too rapid increase of population is restrained, it may be said,
popularly speaking, that wages depend on the checks to
population; that when the check is not death, by starvation or
disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring people;
and that wages in any country are habitually at the lowest rate,
to which in that country the labourer will suffer them to be
depressed rather than put a restraint upon multiplication. 
    What is here meant, however, by wages, is the labourer's real
scale of comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things which
nature or habit has made necessary or agreeable to him: wages in
the sense in which they are of importance to the receiver. In the
sense in which they are of importance to the payer, they do not
depend exclusively on such simple principles. Wages in the first
sense, the wages on which the labourer's comfort depends, we will
call real wages, or wages in kind. Wages in the second sense, we
may be permitted to call, for the present, money wages; assuming,
as it is allowable to do, that money remains for the time an
invariable standard, no iteration taking place in the conditions
under which the circulating medium itself is produced or
obtained. If money itself undergoes no variation in cost, the
money price of labour is an exact measure of the Cost of Labour,
and may be made use of as a convenient symbol to express it. 
    The money wages of labour are a compound result of two
elements: first, real wages, or wages in kind, or in other words,
the quantity which the labourer obtains of the ordinary articles
of consumption; and secondly, the money prices of those articles.
In all old countries -- all countries in which the increase of
population is in any degree checked by the difficulty of
obtaining subsistence -- the habitual money price of labour is
that which will just enable the labourers, one with another, to
purchase the commodities without which they neither cannot or
will not keep up the population at its customary rate of
increase. Their standard of comfort being given, (and by the
standard of comfort in a labouring class, is meant that, rather
than forego which, they will abstain from multiplication,) money
wages depend on the money price, and therefore on the cost of
production, of the various articles which the labourers
habitually consume: because if their wages cannot procure them a
given quantity of these, their increase will slacken, and their
wages rise. Of these articles, food and other agricultural
produce are so much the principal, as to leave little influence
to anything else. 
    It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid of
the principles which have been laid down in this Third Part. The
cost of production of food and agricultural produce has been
analyzed in a preceding chapter. It depends on the productiveness
of the least fertile land, or of the least productively employed
portion of capital, which the necessities of society have as yet
put in requisition for agricultural purposes. The cost of
production of the food grown in these least advantageous
circumstances, determines, as we have seen, the exchange value
and money price of the whole. In any given state, therefore, of
the labourers' habits, their money wages depend on the
productiveness of the least fertile land, or least productive
agricultural capital; on the point which cultivation has reached
in its downward progress -- in its encroachments on the barren
lands, and its gradually increased strain upon the powers of the
more fertile. Now, the force which urges cultivation in this
downward course, is the increase of people; while the
counter-force which checks the descent, is the improvement of
agricultural science and practice, enabling the same soil to
yield to the same labour more ample returns. The costliness of
the most costly part of the produce of cultivation, is an exact
expression of the state, at any given moment, of the race which
population and agricultural skill are always running against each
other. 

    2. It is well said by Dr Chalmers, that many of the most
important lessons in political economy are to be learnt at the
extreme margin of cultivation, the last point which the culture
of the soil has reached in its contest with the spontaneous
agencies of nature. The degree of productiveness of this extreme
margin, is an index to the existing state of the distribution of
the produce among the three classes, of labourers, capitalists,
and landlords. 
    When the demand of an increasing population for more food
cannot be satisfied without extending cultivation to less fertile
land or incurring additional outlay, with a less proportional
return, on land already in cultivation, it is a necessary
condition of this increase of agricultural produce, that the
value and price of that produce must first rise. But as soon as
the price has risen sufficiently to give to the additional outlay
of capital the ordinary profit, the rise will not go on still
further for the purpose of enabling the new land, or the new
expenditure on old land, to yield rent as well as profit. The
land or capital last put in requisition, and occupying what Dr
Chalmers calls the margin of cultivation, will yield, and
continue to yield, no rent. But if this yields no rent, the rent
afforded by all other land or agricultural capital will be
exactly so much as it produces more than this. The price of food
will always on the average be such, that the worst land, and the
least productive instalment of the capital employed on the better
lands, shall just replace the expenses with the ordinary profit.
If the least favoured land and capital just do thus much, all
other land and capital will yield an extra profit, equal to the
proceeds of the extra produce due to their superior
productiveness; and this extra profit becomes, by competition,
the prize of the landlords. Exchange, and money, therefore, make
no difference in the law of rent: it is the same as we originally
found it. Rent is the extra return made to agricultural capital
when employed with peculiar advantages; the exact equivalent of
what those advantages enable the producers to economize in the
cost of production: the value and price of the produce being
regulated by the cost of production to those producers who have
no advantages; by the return to that portion of agricultural
capital, the circumstances of which are the least favourable. 

    3. Wages and Rent being thus regulated by the same principles
when paid in money, as they would be if apportioned in kind, it
follows that Profits are so likewise. For the surplus, after
replacing wages and paying rent, constitutes Profits. 
    We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that the
advances of the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate
elements, consist either in the purchase or maintenance of
labour, or in the profits of former capitalists; and that
therefore profits, in the last resort, depend upon the Cost of
Labour, falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let us
endeavour to trace more minutely the operation of this law. 
    There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which is
correctly represented (money being supposed invariable) by the
money wages of the labourer, may be increased. The labourer may
obtain greater comforts; wages in kind -- real wages -- may rise.
Or the progress of population may force down cultivation to
inferior soils, and more costly processes; thus raising the cost
of production, the value, and the price, of the chief articles of
the labourer's consumption. On either of these suppositions, the
rate of profit will fall. 
    If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only by
reason of their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater
quantity, but not on the whole a greater cost; real wages will be
increased, but not money wages, and there will be nothing to
affect the rate of profit. But if he obtains a greater quantity
of commodities of which the cost of production is not lowered, he
obtains a greater cost; his money wages are higher. The expense
of these increased money wages falls wholly on the capitalist.
There are no conceivable means by which he can shake it off. It
may be said -- it is, not unfrequently, said -- that he will get
rid of it by raising his price. But this opinion we have already,
and more than once, fully refuted.(1*)
    The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an
equivalent rise of prices, is, as we formerly observed,
self-contradictory for if it did so, it would not be a rise of
wages; the labourer would get no more of any commodity than he
had before, let his money wages rise ever so much; a rise of real
wages would be an impossibility. This being equally contrary to
reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of money wages does
not raise prices; that high wages are not a cause of high prices.
A rise of general wages falls on profits. There is no possible
alternative. 
    Having disposed of the case in which the increase of money
wages, and of the Cost of Labour, arises from the labourer's
obtaining more ample wages in kind, let us now suppose it to
arise from the increased cost of production of the things which
he consumes; owing to an increase of population, unaccompanied by
an equivalent increase of agricultural skill. The augmented
supply required by the population would not be obtained, unless
the price of food rose sufficiently to remunerate the farmer for
the increased cost of production. The farmer, however, in this
case sustains a twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his
cultivation under less favourable conditions of productiveness
than before. For this, as it is a disadvantage belonging to him
only as a farmer, and not shared by other employers, he will, on
the general principles of value, be compensated by a rise of the
price of his commodity: indeed, until this rise has taken place,
he will not bring to market the required increase of produce. But
this very rise of price involves him in another necessity, for
which he is not compensated. As the real wages of labour are by
supposition unaltered, he must pay higher money wages to his
labourers. This necessity, being common to him with all other
capitalists, forms no ground for a rise of price. The price will
rise, until it has placed him in as good a situation in respect
of profits, as other employers of labour: it will rise so as to
indemnify him for the increased labour which he must now employ
in order to produce a given quantity of food: but the increased
wages of that labour are a burthen common to all, and for which
no one can be indemnified. It will be paid wholly from profits.
    Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all
descriptions of productive labourers, and when really
representing a greater Cost of Labour, are always and necessary
at the expense of profits. And by reversing the cases, we should
find in like manner that diminished wages, when representing a
really diminished Cost of Labour, are equivalent to a rise of
profits. But the opposition of pecuniary interest thus indicated
between the class of capitalists and that of labourers, is to a
great extent only apparent. Real wages are a very different thing
from the Cost of Labour, and are generally highest at the times
and places where, from the easy terms on which the land yields
all the produce as yet required from it, the value and price of
food being low, the cost of labour to the employer,
notwithstanding its ample remuneration, is comparatively cheap,
and the rate of profit consequently high. We thus obtain a full
confirmation of our original theorem that Profits depend on the
Cost of Labour: or, to express the meaning with still greater
accuracy, the rate of profit and the cost of labour vary
inversely as one another, and are joint effects of the same
agencies or causes. 
    But does not this proposition require to be slightly
modified, by making allowance for that portion (though
comparatively small) of the expenses of the capitalist, which
does not consist in wages paid by himself or reimbursed to
previous capitalists, but in the profits of those previous
capitalists? Suppose, for example, an invention in the
manufacture of leather, the advantage of which should consist in
rendering it unnecessary that the hides should remain for so
great a length of time in the tan-pit. Shoemakers, saddlers, and
other workers in leather, would save a part of that portion of
the cost of their material which consists of the tanner's profits
during the time his capital is locked up; and this saving, it may
be said, is a source from which they might derive an increase of
profit, though wages and the Cost of Labour remained exactly the
same. In the case here supposed, however, the consumer alone
would benefit, since the prices of shoes, harness, and all other
articles into which leather enters, would fall, until the profits
of the producers were reduced to the general level. To obviate
this objection, let us suppose that a similar saving of expense
takes place in all departments of production at once. In that
case, since values and prices would not be affected, profits
would probably be raised; but if we look more closely into the
case we shall find, that it is because the cost of labour would
be lowered. In this as in any other case of increase in the
general productiveness of labour, if the labourer obtained only
the same real wages, profits would be raised: but the same real
wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour; the cost of
production of all things having been, by the supposition,
diminished. If, on the other hand, the real wages of labour rose
proportionally, and the Cost of Labour to the employer remained
the same, the advances of the capitalist would bear the same
ratio to his returns as before, and the rate of profit would be
unaltered. The reader who may wish for a more minute examination
of this point, will find it in the volume of separate Essays to
which reference has before been made.(2*) The question is too
intricate in comparison with its importance, to be further
entered into in a work like the present; and I will merely say,
that it seems to result from the considerations adduced in the
Essay, that there is nothing in the case in question to affect
the integrity of the theory which affirms an exact
correspondence, in an inverse direction, between the rate of
profit and the Cost of Labour. 

NOTES:

1. Supra, book iii. ch. iv. section 2, and ch. xxv. section 4.

2. Essay IV, on Profits and Interest.

