


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 3: Distribution



Chapter  18

Of International Trade





    1. The values of commodities produced at the same place, or

in places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move freely

between them -- let us say, for simplicity, of commodities

produced in the same country -- depend (temporary fluctuations

apart) upon their cost of production. But the value of a

commodity brought from a distant place, especially from a foreign

country, does not depend on its cost of production in the place

from whence it comes. On what, then, does it depend? The value of

a thing in any place, depends on the cost of its acquisition in

that place; which in the case of an imported article, means the

cost of production of the thing which is exported to pay for it. 

    Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere

instrument for exchanging things against one another, we will,

for simplicity, begin by supposing the international trade to be

in form, what it always is in reality, an actual trucking of one

commodity against another. As far as we have hitherto proceeded,

we have found all the laws of interchange to be essentially the

same, whether money is used or not; money never governing, but

always obeying, those general laws. 

    If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for every

pipe of wine a bale of cloth, the exchange value of a pipe of

wine in England will not depend upon what the production of the

wine may have cost in Spain, but upon what the production of the

cloth has cost in England. Though the wine may have cost in Spain

the equivalent of only ten days' labour, yet, if the cloth costs

in England twenty days' labour, the wine, when brought to

England, will exchange for the produce of twenty days' English

labour, plus the cost of carriage; including the usual profit on

the importer's capital, during the time it is locked up, and

withheld from other employment. 

    The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity,

depends on the quantity of home produce which must be given to

the foreign country in exchange for it. In other words, the

values of foreign commodities depend on the terms of

international exchange. What, then, do these depend upon? What is

it, which, in the case supposed, causes a pipe of wine from Spain

to be exchanged with England for exactLy that quantity of cloth?

We have seen that it is not their cost of production. If the

cloth and the wine were both made in Spain, they would exchange

at their cost of production in Spain; if they were both made in

England, they would exchange at their cost of production in

England: but all the cloth being made in England, and all the

wine in Spain, they are in circumstances to which we have already

determined that the law of cost of production is not applicable.

We must accordingly, as we have done before in a similar

embarrassment, fall back upon an antecedent law, that of supply

and demand: and in this we shall again find the solution of our

difficulty. 

    I have discussed this question in a separate Essay, already

once referred to; and a quotation of part of the exposition then

given, will she the best introduction to my present view of the

subjects. I must give notice that we are now in the region of the

most complicated questions which political economy affords; that

the subject is one which cannot possibly, and that a more

continuous effort of attention than be made elementary; has yet

been required, will be necessary to follow the series of

deductions. The thread, however, which we are about to take in

hand, is in itself very simple and manageable; the only

difficulty is in following it through the windings and

entanglements of complex international transactions. 



    2. "When the trade is established between the two countries,

the two commodities will exchange for each other at the same rate

of interchange in both countries -- bating the cost of carriage,

of which, for the present, it will be more convenient to omit the

consideration. Supposing, therefore, for the sake of argument,

that the carriage of the commodities from one country to the

other could be effected without labour and without cost, no

sooner would the trade be opened than the value of the two

commodities, estimated in each other, would come to a level in

both countries. 

    "Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England as much

labour as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20." In

common with most of my predecessors, I find it advisable, in

these intricate investigations, to give distinctness and fixity

to the conception by numerical examples. These examples must

sometimes, as in the present case, be purely supposititious. I

should have preferred real ones; but all that is essential is,

that the numbers should be such as admit of being easily followed

through the subsequent combinations into which they enter. 

    This supposition then being made, it would be the interest of

England to import linen from Germany, and of Germany to import

cloth from England. "When each country produced both commodities

for itself, 10 yards of cloth exchanged for 15 yards of linen in

England, and for 20 in Germany. They will now exchange for the

same number of yards of linen in both. For what number?  If for

15 yards, England will be just as she was, and Germany will gain

all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before, and England will

derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number intermediate

between 15 and 20, the advantage will be shared between the two

countries. If, for example, 10 yards of cloth exchange for 18 of

linen, England will gain an advantage of 3 yards on every 15,

Germany will save 2 out of every 20. The problem is, what are the

causes which determine the proportion in which the cloth of

England and the linen of Germany will exchange for each other. 

    "As exchange value, in this case as in every other, is

proverbially fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it

to be when we begin: we shall soon see whether there be any fixed

point about which it oscillates, which it has a tendency always

to approach to, and to remain at. Let us suppose, then, that by

the effect of what Adam Smith calls the higgling of the market,

10 yards of cloth in both countries, exchange for 17 yards of

linen. 

    "The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it

which can find a purchaser, varies as we have before remarked,

according to the price. In Germany the price of 10 yards of cloth

is now 17 yards of linen, or whatever quantity of money is

equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of linen. Now, that being the

price, there is some particular number of yards of cloth, which

will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at that price. There

is some given quantity of cloth, more than which could not be

disposed of at that price; less than which, at that price, would

not fully satisfy the demand. Let us suppose this quantity to be

1000 times 10 yards.

    "Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price

of 17 yards of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever quantity

of money is equivalent in England to 10 yards of cloth. There is

some particular number of yards of linen which, at that price,

will exactly satisfy the demand, and no more. Let us suppose that

this number is 1000 times 17 yards.

    "As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are 1000

times 17 yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing exchange

value, the linen which England requires will exactly pay for the

quantity of cloth which, on the same terms of interchange,

Germany requires. The demand on each side is precisely sufficient

to carry off the supply on the other. The conditions required by

the principle of demand and supply are fulfilled, and the two

commodities will continue to be interchanged, as we supposed them

to be, in the ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth. 

    "But our suppositions might have been different. Suppose

that, at the assumed rate of interchange, England has been

disposed to consume no greater quantity of linen than 800 times

17 yards: it is evident that, at the rate supposed, this would

not have sufficed to pay for the 1000 times 10 yards of cloth

which we have supposed Germany to require at the assumed value.

Germany would be able to procure no more than 800 times 10 yards

at that price. To procure the remaining 200, which she would have

no means of doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer

more than 17 yards of linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth:

let us suppose her to offer 18. At this price, perhaps, England

would be inclined to purchase a greater quantity of linen. She

would consume, possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On

the other hand, cloth having risen in price, the demand of

Germany for it would probably have diminished. If, instead of

1000 times 10 yards, she is now contented with 900 times 10

yards, these will exactly pay for the 900 times 18 yards of linen

which England is willing to take at the altered price: the demand

on each side will again exactly suffice to take off the

corresponding supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at

which, in both countries, cloth will exchange for linen. 

    "The converse of all this would have happened, if, instead of

800 times 17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of

10 for 17, would have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this

case, it is England whose demand is not fully supplied; it is

England who, by bidding for more linen, will alter the rate of

interchange to her own disadvantage; and 10 yards of cloth will

fall, in both countries, below the value of 17 yards of linen. By

this fall of cloth, or what is the same thing, this rise of

linen, the demand of Germany for cloth will increase, and the

demand of England for linen will diminish, till the rate of

interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and the linen

will exactly pay for one another; and when once this point is

attained, values will remain without further alteration.     "It

may he considered, therefore, as established, that when two

countries trade together in two commodities, the exchange value

of these commodities relatively to each other will adjust itself

to the inclinations and circumstances of the consumers on both

sides, in such manner that the quantities required by each

country, of the articles which it imports from its neighbour,

shall be exactly sufficient to pay for one another. As the

inclinations and circumstances of consumers cannot be reduced to

any rule, so neither can the proportions in which the two

commodities will be interchanged. We know that the limits within

which the variation is confined, are the ratio between their

costs of production in the one country, and the ratio between

their costs of production in the other. Ten yards of cloth cannot

exchange for more than 20 yards of linen, nor for less than 15.

But they may exchange for any intermediate number. The ratios,

therefore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided

between the two nations, are various. The circumstances on which

the proportionate share of each country more remotely depends,

admit only of a very general indication. 

    "It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which

the whole of the advantage resulting from the interchange would

be reaped by one party, the other country gaining nothing at all.

There is no absurdity in the hypothesis that, of some given

commodity, a certain quantity is all that is wanted at any price;

and that, when that quantity is obtained, no fall in the exchange

value would induce other consumers to come forward, or those who

are already supplied, to take more. Let us suppose that this is

the case in Germany with cloth. Before her trade with England

commenced, when 10 yards of cloth cost her as much labour as 20

yards of linen, she nevertheless consumed as much cloth as she

wanted under any circumstances, and, if she could obtain it at

the rate of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not

consume more. Let this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At

the rate, however, of 10 for 20, England would want more linen

than would be equivalent to this quantity of cloth. She would

consequently, offer a higher value for linen; or, what is the

same thing, she would offer her cloth at a cheaper rate. But, as

by no lowering of the value could she prevail on Germany to take

a greater quantity of cloth, there would be no limit to the rise

of linen or fall of cloth, until the demand of England for linen

was reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which 1000

times 10 yards of cloth would purchase. It might be, that to

produce this diminution of the demand a less fall would not

suffice than that which would make 10 yards of cloth exchange for

15 of linen. Germany would then gain the whole of the advantage,

and England would be exactly as she was before the trade

commenced. It would be for the interest, however, of Germany

herself to keep her linen a little below the value at which it

could be produced in England, in order to keep herself from being

supplanted by the home producer. England, therefore, would always

benefit in some degree by the existence of the trade, though it

might be a very fig one." 

    In this statement, I conceive, is contained the first

elementary principle of International Values. I have, as is

indispensable in such abstract and hypothetical cases, supposed

the circumstances to be much less complex than they really are:

in the first place, by suppressing the cost of carriage; next, by

supposing that there are only two countries trading together; and

lastly, that they trade only in two commodities. To render the

exposition of the principle complete, it is necessary to restore

the various circumstances thus temporarily left out to simplify

the argument. Those who are accustomed to any kind of scientific

investigation will probably see, without formal proof, that the

introduction of these circumstances cannot alter the theory of

the subject. Trade among any number of countries, and in any

number of commodities, must take place on the same essential

principles as trade between two countries and in two commodities.

Introducing a greater number of agents precisely similar, cannot

change the law of their action, no more than putting additional

weights into the two scales of a balance alters the law of

gravitation. It alters nothing but the numerical results. For

more complete satisfaction, however, we will enter into the

complex cases with the same particularity with which we have

stated the simpler one. 



    3. First, let us introduce the element of cost of carriage.

The chief difference will then be, that the cloth and the linen

will no longer exchange for each other at precisely the same rate

in both countries. Linen, having to be carried to England, will

be dearer there by its cost of carriage; and cloth will be dearer

in Germany by the cost of carrying it from England. Linen,

estimated in cloth, will be dearer in England than in Germany, by

the cost of carriage of both articles: and so will cloth in

Germany, estimated in linen. Suppose that the cost of carriage of

each is equivalent to one yard of linen; and suppose that, if

they could have been carried without cost, the terms of

interchange would have been 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen. It

may seem at first that each country will pay its own cost of

carriage; that is, the carriage of the article it Sports; that in

Germany 10 yards of cloth will exchange for 18 of linen, namely,

the original 17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of the

cloth; while in England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16

of linen, 1 yard being deducted for the cost of carriage of the

linen. This, however, cannot be affirmed with certainty; it will

only be true, if the linen which the English consumers would take

at the price of 10 for 16, exactly pays for the cloth which the

German consumers would take at 10 for 18. The values, whatever

they are, must establish this equilibrium. No absolute rule,

therefore, can be laid down for the division of the cost, no more

than for the division of the advantage: and it does not follow

that in whatever ratio the one is divided, the other will be

divided in the same. It is impossible to say, if the cost of

carriage could be annihilated, whether the producing or the

importing country would be most benefited. This would depend on

the play of international demand. Cost of carriage has one effect

more. But for it, every commodity would (if trade be supposed

free) be either regularly imported or regularly exported. A

country would make nothing for itself which it did not also make

for other countries. But in consequence of cost of carriage there

are many things, especially bulky articles, which every, or

almost every country produces within itself. After exporting the

things in which it can employ itself most advantageously, and

importing those in which it is under the greatest disadvantage,

there are many lying between, of which the relative cost of

production in that and in other countries differs so little, that

the cost of carriage would absorb more than the whole saving in

cost of production which would be obtained by importing one and

exporting another. This is the case with numerous commodities of

common consumption; including the coarser qualities of many

articles of food and manufacture, of which the finer kinds are

the subject of extensive international traffic. 



    4.  Let us now introduce a greater number of commodities than

the two we have hitherto supposed. Let cloth and linen, however,

be still the articles of which the comparative cost of production

in England and in Germany differs the most; so that if they were

confined to two commodities, these would be the two which it

would be most their interest to exchange. We will now again omit

cost of carriage, which, having been shown not to affect the

essentials of the question, does but embarrass unnecessarily the

statement of it. Let us suppose, then, that the demand of England

for linen is either so much greater than that of Germany for

cloth, or so much more extensible by cheapness, that if England

had no commodity but cloth which Germany would take, the demand

of England would force up the terms of interchange to 10 yards of

cloth for only 16 of linen, so that England would gain only the

difference between 15 and 16, Germany the difference between 16

and 20. But let us now suppose that England has also another

commodity, say iron, which is in demand in Germany, and that the

quantity of iron which is of equal value in England with 10 yards

of cloth, (let us call this quantity a hundredweight) will, if

produced in Germany, cost as much labour as 18 yards of linen, so

that if offered by England for 17, it will undersell the German

producer. In these circumstances, linen will not be forced up to

the rate of 16 yards for 10 of cloth, but will stop, suppose at

17; for although, at that rate of interchange, Germany will not

take enough cloth to pay for all the linen required by England,

she will take iron for the reminder, and it is the same thing to

England whether she gives a hundredweight of iron or 10 yards of

cloth, both being made at the same cost. If we now superadd coals

or cottons on the side of England, and wine, or corn, or timber,

on the side of Germany, it will make no difference in the

principle. The exports of each country must exactly pay for the

imports; meaning now the aggregate exports and imports, not those

of particular commodities taken singly. The produce of fifty

days' English labour, whether in cloth, coals, iron, or any other

exports, will exchange for the produce of forty, or fifty, or

sixty days' German labour, in linen, wine, corn, or timber,

according to the international demand. There is some proportion

at which the demand of the two countries for each other's

products will exactly correspond: so that the things supplied by

England to Germany will be completely paid for, and no more, by

those supplied by Germany to England. This accordingly will be

the ratio in which the produce of English and the produce of

German labour will exchange for one another. 

    If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the

greatest share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the

answer is, the country for whose productions there is in other

countries the greatest demand, and a demand the most susceptible

of increase from additional cheapness. In so far as the

productions of any country possess this property, the country

obtains all foreign commodities at less cost. It gets its imports

cheaper, the greater the intensity of the demand in foreign

countries for its exports. It also gets its imports cheaper, the

less the extent and intensity of its own demand for them. The

market is cheapest to those whose demand is small. A country

which desires few foreign productions, and only a limited

quantity of them, while its own commodities are in great request

in foreign countries, will obtain its limited imports at

extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the produce of a

very small quantity of its labour and capital. 

    Lastly, having introduced more than the original two

commodities into the hypothesis, let us also introduce more than

the original two countries. After the demand of England for the

linen of Germany has raised the rate of interchange to 10 yards

of cloth for 16 of linen, suppose a trade opened between England

and some other country which also exports linen. And let us

suppose that if England had no trade but with this third country,

the play of international demand would enable her to obtain from

it, for 10 yards of cloth or its equivalent, 17 yards of linen.

She evidently would not go on buying linen from Germany at the

former rate: Germany would be undersold, and must consent to give

17 yards, like the other country. In this case, the circumstances

of production and of demand in the third country are supposed to

be in themselves more advantageous to England than the

circumstances of Germany; but this supposition is not necessary:

we might suppose that if the trade with Germany did not exist,

England would be obliged to give to the other country the same

advantageous terms which she gives to Germany; 10 yards of cloth

for 16, or even less than 16, of linen. Even so, the opening of

the third country makes a great difference in favour of England.

There is now a double market for English exports, while the

demand of England for linen is only what it was before. This

necessarily obtains for England more advantageous terms of

interchange. The two countries, requiring much more of her

produce than was required by either alone, must, in order to

obtain it, force an increased demand for their exports, by

offering them at a lower value. 

    It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England

from the opening of another market for her exports, will equally

be produced even though the country from which the demand comes

should have nothing to sell which England is willing to take.

Suppose that the third country, though requiring cloth or iron

from England, produces no linen, nor any other article which is

in demand there. She however produces exportable articles, or she

would have no means of paying for imports: her exports, though

not suitable to the English consumer, can find a market

somewhere. As we are only supposing three countries, we must

assume her to find this market in Germany, and to pay for what

she imports from England by orders on her German customers.

Germany, therefore, besides having to pay for her own imports,

now owes a debt to England on account of the third country, and

the means for both purposes must be derived from her exportable

produce. She must therefore tender that produce to England on

terms sufficiently favourable to force a demand equivalent to

this double debt. Everything will take place precisely as if the

third country had bought German produce with her own goods, and

offered that produce to England in exchange for hers. There is an

increased demand for English goods, for which German goods have

to furnish the payment; and this can only be done by forcing an

increased demand for them in England, that is, by lowering their

value. Thus an increase of demand for a country's exports in any

foreign country, enables her to obtain more cheaply even those

imports which she procures from other quarters. And conversely,

an increase of her own demand for any foreign commodity compels

her, caeteris paribus, to pay dearer for all foreign commodities.



    The law which we have now illustrated, may be appropriately

named, the Equation of International Demand. It may be concisely

stated as follows. The produce of a country exchanges for the

produce of other countries, at such values as are required in

order that the whole of her exports may exactly pay for the whole

of her imports. This law of International Values is but an

extension of the more general law of Value, which we called the

Equation of Supply and Demand.(1*) We have seen that the value of

a commodity always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to

the exact level of the supply. But all trade, either between

nations or individuals, is an interchange of commodities, in

which the things that they respectively have to sell, constitute

also their means of purchase: the supply brought by the one

constitutes his demand for what is brought by the other. So that

supply and demand are but another expression for reciprocal

demand: and to say that value will adjust itself so as to

equalize demand with supply, is in fact to say that it will

adjust itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with the

demand on the other. 



    5. To trace the consequences of this law of International

Values through their wide ramifications, would occupy more space

than can be here devoted to such a purpose. But there is one of

its applications which I will notice, as being in itself not

unimportant, as bearing on the question which will occupy us in

the next chapter, and especially as conducing to the more full

and clear understanding of the law itself. 

    We have seen that the value at which a country purchases a

foreign commodity, does not conform to the cost of production in

the country from which the commodity comes. Suppose now a change

in that cost of production; an improvement, for example, in the

process of manufacture. Will the benefit of the improvement be

fully participated in by other countries? Will the commodity be

sold as much cheaper to foreigners, as it is produced cheaper at

home? This question, and the considerations which must be entered

into in order to resolve it, are well adapted to try the worth of

the theory. 

    Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature to

create a new branch of export: to make foreigners resort to the

country for a commodity which they had previously produced at

home. On this supposition, the foreign demand for the productions

of the country is increased; which necessarily alters the

international values to its advantage, and to the disadvantage of

foreign countries, who, therefore, though they participate in the

benefit of the new product, must purchase that benefit by paying

for all the other productions of the country at a dearer rate

than before. How much dearer, will depend on the degree necessary

for re-establishing, under these new conditions, the Equation of

International Demand. These consequences follow in a very obvious

manner from the law of international values, and I shall not

occupy space in illustrating them, but shall pass to the more

frequent case, of an improvement which does not create a new

article of export, but lowers the cost of production of something

which the country already exported. 

    It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated

nature, to employ definite numerical amounts, we shall return to

our original example. Ten yards of cloth, if produced in Germany,

would require the same amount of labour and capital as twenty

yards of linen; but by the play of international demand, they can

be obtained from England for seventeen. Suppose now, that by a

mechanical improvement made in Germany, and not capable of being

transferred to England, the same quantity of labour and capital

which produced twenty yards of linen, is enabled to produce

thirty. Linen falls one-third in value in the German market, as

compared with other commodities produced in Germany. Will it also

fall one-third as compared with English cloth, thus giving to

England, in common with Germany, the full benefit of the

improvement? Or (ought we not rather to say), since the cost to

England of obtaining linen was not regulated by the cost to

Germany of producing it, and since England, accordingly, did not

get the entire benefit even of the twenty yards which Germany

could have given for ten yards of cloth, but only obtained

seventeen -- why should she now obtain more, merely because this

theoretical limit is removed ten degrees further off? 

    It is evident that in the outset, the improvement will lower

the value of linen in Germany, in relation to all other

commodities in the German market, including, among the rest, even

the imported commodity, cloth. If 10 yards of cloth previously

exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they will now exchange for half

as much more, or 25 1/2 yards. But whether they will continue to

do so, will depend on the effect which this increased cheapness

of linen produces on the international demand. The demand for

linen in England could scarcely fail to be increased. But it

might be increased either in proportion to the cheapness, or in a

greater proportion than the cheapness, or in a less proportion. 

    If the demand was increased in the same proportion with the

cheapness, England would take as many times 25 1/2 yards of

linen, as the number of times 17 yards which she took previously.

She would expend in linen exactly as much of cloth, or of the

equivalents of cloth, as much in short of the collective income

of her people, as she did before. Germany on her part, would

probably require, at that rate of interchange, the same quantity

of cloth as before, because it would in reality cost her exactly

as much; 25 1/2 yards of linen being now of the same value in her

market, as 17 yards were before. In this case, therefore, 10

yards of cloth for 25 1/2 of linen is the rate of interchange

which under these new conditions would restore the equation of

international demand; and England would obtain linen one-third

cheaper than before, being the same advantage as was obtained by

Germany. 

    It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of linen

would increase the demand for it in England in a greater ratio

than the increase of cheapness; and that if she before wanted

1000 times 17 yards, she would now require more than 1000 times

25 1/2 yards to satisfy her demand. If so, the equation of

international demand cannot establish itself at that rate of

interchange; to pay for the linen England must offer cloth on

more advantageous terms; say, for example, 10 yards for 21 of

linen; so that England will not have the full benefit of the

improvement in the production of linen, while Germany, in

addition to that benefit, will also pay less for cloth. But

again, it is possible that England might not desire to increase

her consumption of linen in even so great a proportion as that of

the increased cheapness; she might not desire so great a quantity

as 1000 times 25 1/2 yards: and in that case Germany must force a

demand, by offering more than 25 1/2 yards of linen for 10 of

cloth: linen will be cheapened in England in a still greater

degree than in Germany; while Germany will obtain cloth on more

unfavourable terms; and at a higher exchange value than before. 

    After what has already been said, it is not necessary to

particularize the manner in which these results might be modified

by introducing into the hypothesis other countries and other

commodities. There is a further circumstance by which they may

also be modified. In the case supposed the consumers of Germany

have had a part of their incomes set at liberty by the increased

cheapness of linen, which they may indeed expend in increasing

their consumption of that article, but which they may likewise

expend in other articles, and among others, in cloth or other

imported commodities. This would be an additional element in the

international demand, and would modify more or less the terms of

interchange. 

    Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheapness

on demand, which is the more probable -- that the demand would be

increased more than the cheapness, as much as the cheapness, or

less than the cheapness? This depends on the nature of the

particular commodity, and on the tastes of purchasers. When the

commodity is one in general request, and the fall of it price

brings it within reach of a much larger class of incomes than

before, the demand is often increased in a greater ratio than the

fall of price, and a larger sum of money is on the whole expended

in the article. Such was the case with coffee, when its price was

lowered by successive reductions of taxation; and such would

probably be the case with sugar, wine, and a large class of

commodities which, though not necessaries, are largely consumed,

and in which many consumers indulge when the articles are cheap

and economize when they are dear. But it more frequently happens

that when a commodity falls in price, less money is spent in it

than before: a greater quantity is consumed, but not so great a

value. The consumer who saves money by the cheapness of the

article, will be likely to expend part of the saving in

increasing his consumption of other things: and unless the low

price attract a large class of new purchasers who were either not

consumers of the article at all, or only in small quantity and

occasionally, a less aggregate sum will be expended on it.

Speaking generally, therefore, the third of our three cases is

the most probable: and an improvement in an exportable article is

likely to be as beneficial (if not more beneficial) to foreign

countries, as to the country where the article is produced. 



    6. Thus far had the theory of international values been

carried in the first and second editions of this work. But

intelligent criticisms (chiefly those of my friend Mr William

Thornton), and subsequent further investigation, have shown that

the doctrine stated in the preceding pages, though correct as far

as it goes, is not yet the complete theory of the subject matter.



    It has been shown that the exports and imports between the

two countries (or, if we suppose more than two, between each

country and the world) must in the aggregate pay for each other,

and must therefore be exchanged for one another at such values as

will be compatible with the equation of international demand.

That this, however, does not furnish the complete law of the

phenomenon, appears from the following consideration: that

several different rates of international value may all equally

fulfil the conditions of this law. 

    The supposition was, that England could produce 10 yards of

cloth with the same labour as 15 of linen, and Germany with the

same labour as 20 of linen; that a trade was opened between the

two countries; that England thenceforth confined her production

to cloth, and Germany to linen; and, that if 10 yards of cloth

should thenceforth exchange for 17 of linen, England and Germany

would exactly supply each other's demand: that, for instance, if

England wanted at that price 17,000 yards of linen, Germany would

want exactly the 10,000 yards of cloth, which, at that price,

England would be required to give for the linen. Under these

suppositions it appeared, that 10 cloth for 17 linen, would be,

in point of fact, the international values. 

    But it is quite possible that some other rate, such as 10

cloth for 18 linen, might also fulfil the conditions of the

equation of international demand. Suppose that at this last rate,

England would want more linen than at the rate of 10 for 17, but

not in the ratio of the cheapness; that she would not want the

18,000 which she could now buy with 10,000 yards of cloth, but

would be content with 17,500, for which she would pay (at the new

rate of 10 for 18) 9722 yards of cloth. Germany, again, having to

pay dearer for cloth than when it could be bought at 10 for 17,

would probably reduce her consumption to an amount below 10,000

yards, perhaps to the very same number, 9722. Under these

conditions the Equation of International Demand would still

exist. Thus, the rate of 10 for 17, and that of 10 for 18, would

equally satisfy the Equation of Demand: and many other rates of

interchange might satisfy it in like manner. It is conceivable

that the conditions might be equally satisfied by every numerical

rate which could be supposed. There is still therefore a portion

of indeterminateness in the rate at which the international

values would adjust themselves; showing that the whole of the

influencing circumstances cannot yet have been taken into

account. 



    7. It will be found that to supply this deficiency, we must

take into consideration not only, as we have already done, the

quantities demanded in each country, of the imported commodities;

but also the extent of the means of supplying that demand, which

are set at liberty in each country by the change in the direction

of its industry. 

    To illustrate this point it will be necessary to choose more

convenient numbers than those which we have hitherto employed.

Let it be supposed that in England 100 yards of cloth, previously

to the trade, exchanged for 100 of linen, but that in Germany 100

of cloth exchanged for 200 of linen. When the trade was opened,

England would supply cloth to Germany, Germany linen to England,

at an exchange value which would depend partly on the element

already discussed, viz. the comparative degree in which, in the

two countries, increased cheapness operates in increasing the

demand; and partly on some other element not yet taken into

account. In order to isolate this unknown element, it will be

necessary to make some definite and invariable supposition in

regard to the known element. Let us therefore assume, that the

influence of cheapness on demand conforms to some simple law,

common to both countries and to both commodities. As the simplest

and most convenient, let us suppose that in both countries any

given increase of cheapness produces an exactly proportional

increase of consumption: or, in other words, that the value

expended in the commodity, the cost incurred for the sake of

obtaining it, is always the same, whether that cost affords a

greater or a smaller quantity of the commodity. 

    Let us now suppose that England, previously to the trade,

required a million of yards of linen, which were worth at the

English cost of production, a million yards of cloth. By turning

all the labour and capital with which that linen was produced, to

the production of cloth, she would produce for exportation a

million yards of cloth. Suppose that this is the exact quantity

which Germany is accustomed to consume. England can dispose of

all this cloth in Germany at the German price; she must consent

indeed to take a little less until she has driven the German

producer from the market, but as soon as this is effected, she

can sell her million of cloth for two millions of linen; being

the quantity that the German clothiers are enabled to make, by

transferring their whole labour and capital from cloth to linen.

Thus England would gain the whole benefit of the trade, and

Germany nothing. This would be perfectly consistent with the

equation of international demand: since England (according to the

hypothesis in the preceding paragraph) now requires two millions

of linen (being able to get them at the same cost at which she

previously obtained only one), while the prices in Germany not

being altered, Germany requires as before exactly a million of

cloth, and can obtain it by employing the labour and capital set

at liberty from the production of cloth, in producing the two

millions of linen required by England. 

    Thus far we have supposed that the additional cloth which

England could make, by transferring to cloth the whole of the

capital previously employed in making linen, was exactly

sufficient to supply the whole of Germany's existing demand. But

suppose next that it is more than sufficient. Suppose that while

England could make with her liberated capital a million yards of

cloth for exportation, the cloth which Germany had heretofore

required was 800,000 yards only, equivalent at the German cost of

production to 1,600,000 yards of linen. England therefore could

not dispose of a whole million of cloth in Germany at the German

prices. Yet she wants, whether cheap or dear (by our

supposition), as much linen as can be bought for a million of

cloth: and since this can only be obtained from Germany, or by

the more expensive process of production at home, the holders of

the million of cloth will be forced by each other's competition

to offer it to Germany on any terms (short of the English cost of

production) which will induce Germany to take the whole. What

terms these would be, the supposition we have made enables us

exactly to define. The 800,000 yards of cloth which Germany

consumed, cost her the equivalent of 1,600,000 linen, and that

invariable cost is what she is willing to expend in cloth,

whether the quantity it obtains for her be more or less. England

therefore, to induce Germany to take a million of cloth, must

offer it for 1,600,000 of linen. The international values will

thus be 100 cloth for 160 linen, intermediate between the ratio

of the costs of production in England and that of the costs of

production in Germany: and the two countries will divide the

benefit of the trade, England gaining in the aggregate 600,000

yards of linen, and Germany being richer by 200,000 additional

yards of cloth. 

    Let us now stretch the last supposition still farther, and

suppose that the cloth previously consumed by Germany was not

only less than the million yards which England is enabled to

furnish by discontinuing her production of linen, but less in the

full proportion of England's advantage in the production, that

is, that Germany only required half a million. In this case, by

ceasing altogether to produce cloth, Germany can add a million,

but a million only, to her production of linen, and this million,

being the equivalent of what the half million previously cost

her, is all that she can be induced by any degree of cheapness to

expend in cloth. England will be forced by her own competition to

give a whole million of cloth for this million of linen, just as

she was forced in the preceding case to give it for 1,600,000.

But England could have produced at the same cost a million yards

of linen for herself. England therefore derives, in this case, no

advantage from the international trade. Germany gains the whole;

obtaining a million of cloth instead of half a million, at what

the half million previously cost her. Germany, in short, is in

this third case, exactly in the same situation as England was in

the first case; which may easily be verified by reversing the

figures. 

    As the general result of the three cases, it may be laid down

as a theorem, that under the supposition we have made of a demand

exactly in proportion to the cheapness, the law of international

value will be as follows: --

    The whole of the cloth which England can make with the

capital previously devoted to linen, will exchange for the whole

of the linen which Germany can make with the capital previously

devoted to cloth. 

    Or, still more generally,

    The whole of the commodities which the two countries can

respectively make for exportation, with the labour and capital

thrown out of employment by importation, will exchange against

one another. 

    This law, and the three different possibilities arising from

it in respect to the division of the advantage, may be

conveniently generalized by means of algebraical symbols, as

follows:Let the quantity of cloth which England can make with the

labour and capital withdrawn from the production of linen, be =

n. 

    Let the cloth previously required by Germany (at the German

cost of production) be = m. 

    Then n of cloth will always exchange for exactly 2m of linen.

    Consequently if n = m, the whole advantage will be on the

side of England. 

    If n = 2m, the whole advantage will be on the side of

Germany.

    If n be greater than m, but less than 2m, the two countries

will share the advantage; England getting 2m of linen where she

before got only n; Germany getting n of cloth where she before

got only m. It is almost superfluous to observe that the figure 2

stands where it does, only because it is the figure which

expresses the advantage of Germany over England in linen as

estimated in cloth, and (what is the same thing) of England over

Germany in cloth as estimated in linen. If we had supposed that

in Germany, before the trade, 100 of cloth exchanged for 1000

instead of 200 of linen, then n (after the trade commenced) would

have exchanged for 10m instead of 2m. If instead of 1000 or 200

we had supposed only 150, n would have exchanged for only 3/2 m.

If (in fine) the cost value of cloth (as estimated in linen) in

Germany, exceeds the cost value similarly estimated in England,

in the ratio of p to q, then will n, after the opening of the

trade, exchange for p/q m.(2*) 



    8. We have now arrived at what seems a law of International

Values, of great simplicity and generality. But we have done so

by setting out from a purely arbitrary hypothesis respecting the

relation between demand and cheapness. We have assumed their

relation to be fixed, though it is essentially variable. We have

supposed that every increase of cheapness produces an exactly

proportional extension of demand; in other words, that the same

invariable value is laid out in a commodity whether it be cheap

or dear; and the law which we have investigated holds good only

on this hypothesis, or some other practically equivalent to it.

Let us now, therefore, combine the two variable elements of the

question, the variations of each of which we have considered

separately. Let us suppose the relation between demand and

cheapness to vary, and to become such as would prevent the rule

of interchange laid down in the last theorem from satisfying the

conditions of the Equation of International Demand. Let it be

supposed, for instance, that the demand of England for linen is

exactly proportional to the cheapness, but that of Germany for

cloth, not proportional. To revert to the second of our three

cases, the case in which England by discontinuing the production

of linen could produce for exportation a million yards of cloth,

and Germany by ceasing to produce cloth could produce an

additional 1,600,000 yards of linen. If the one of these

quantities exactly exchanged for the other, the demand of England

would on our present supposition be exactly satisfied, for she

requires all the linen which can be got for a million yards of

cloth: but Germany perhaps, though she required 800,000 cloth at

a cost equivalent to 1,600,000 linen, yet when she can get a

million of cloth at the same cost, may not require the whole

million; or may require more than a million. First, let her not

require so much; but only as much as she can now buy for

1,500,000 linen. England will still offer a million for these

1,500,000; but even this may not induce Germany to take so much

as a million; and if England continues to expend exactly the same

aggregate cost on linen whatever be the price, she will have to

submit to take for her million of cloth any quantity of linen

(not less than a million) which may be requisite to induce

Germany to take a million of cloth. Suppose this to be 1,400,000

yards. England has now reaped from the trade a gain not of

600,000 but only of 400,000 yards; while Germany, besides having

obtained an extra 200,000 yards of cloth, has obtained it with

only seven-eighths of the labour and capital which she previously

expended in supplying herself with cloth, and may expend the

remainder in increasing her own consumption of linen, or of any

other commodity. 

    Suppose on the contrary that Germany, at the rate of a

million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, requires more than a million

yards of cloth. England having only a million which she can give

without trenching upon the quantity she previously reserved for

herself, Germany must bid for the extra cloth at a higher rate

than 160 for 100, until she reaches a rate (say 170 for 100)

which will either bring down her own demand for cloth to the

limit of a million, or else tempt England to part with some of

the cloth she previously consumed at home. 

    Let us next suppose that the proportionality of demand to

cheapness, instead of holding good in one country but not in the

other, does not hold good in either country, and that the

deviation is of the same kind in both; that, for instance,

neither of the two increases its demand in a degree equivalent to

the increase of cheapness. On this supposition, at the rate of

one million cloth for 1,600,000 linen, England will not want so

much as 1,600,000 linen, nor Germany so much as a million cloth:

and if they fall short of that amount in exactly the same degree:

if England only wants linen to the amount of nine-tenths of

1,600,000 (1,440,000), and Germany only nine hundred thousand of

cloth, the interchange will continue to take place at the same

rate. And so if England wants a tenth more than 1,600,000, and

Germany a tenth more than a million. This coincidence (which, it

is to be observed, supposes demand to extend cheapness in a

corresponding, but not in an equal degree(3*)) evidently could

not exist unless by mere accident: and in any other case, the

equation of international demand would require a different

adjustment of international values. 

    The only general law, then, which can be laid down, is this.

The values at which a country exchanges its produce with foreign

countries depend on two things: first, on the amount and

extensibility of their demand for its commodities, compiled with

its demand for theirs; and secondly, on the capital which it has

to spare, from the production of domestic commodities for its own

consumption. The more the foreign demand for its commodities

exceeds its demand for foreign commodities, and the less capital

it can spile to produce for foreign markets, compiled with what

foreigners spile to produce for its markets, the more favourable

to it will be the terms of interchange: that is, the more it will

obtain of foreign commodities in return for a given quantity of

its own. 

    But these two influencing circumstances are in reality

reducible to one: for the capital which a country has to spile

from the production of domestic commodities for its own use, is

in proportion to its own demand for foreign commodities: whatever

proportion of its collective income it expends in purchases from

abroad, that same proportion of its capital is left without a

home market for its productions. The new element, therefore,

which for the sake of scientific correctness we have introduced

into the theory of international values, does not seem to make

any very material difference in the practical result. It still

appears that the countries which carry on their foreign trade on

the most advantageous terms, are those whose commodities are most

in demand by foreign countries, and which have themselves the

least demand for foreign commodities. From which, among other

consequences, it follows, that the richest countries, caeteris

paribus, gain the least by a given amount of foreign commerce:

since, having a greater demand for commodities generally, they

are likely to have a greater demand for foreign commodities, and

thus modify the terms of interchange to their own disadvantage.

Their aggregate gains by foreign trade, doubtless, are generally

greater than those of poorer countries, since they carry on a

greater amount of such trade, and gain the benefit of cheapness

on a larger consumption: but their gain is less on each

individual article consumed. 



    9. We now pass to another essential part of the theory of the

subject. There are two senses in which a country obtains

commodities cheaper by foreign trade; in the sense of Value, and

in the sense of Cost. It gets them cheaper in the first sense, by

their falling in value relatively to other things: the same

quantity of them exchanging, in the country, for a smaller

quantity than before of the other produce of the country. To

revert to our original figures; in England, all consumers of

linen obtained, after the trade was opened, 17 or some greater

number of yards for the same quantity of all other things for

which they before obtained only 15. The degree of cheapness, in

this sense of the term, depends on the claws of International

Demand, so copiously illustrated in the preceding sections. But

in the other sense, that of Cost, a country gets a commodity

cheaper when it obtains a greater quantity of the commodity with

the same expenditure of labour and capital. In this sense of the

term, cheapness in a great measure depends upon a cause of a

different nature: a country gets its imports cheaper, in

proportion to the general productiveness of its domestic

industry; to the general efficiency of its labour. The labour of

one country may be, as a whole, much more efficient than that of

another: all or most of the commodities capable of being produced

in both, may be produced in one at less absolute cost than in the

other; which, as we have seen, will not necessity prevent the two

countries from exchanging commodities. The things which the more

favoured country will import from others, are of course those in

which it is least superior; but by importing them it acquires,

even in those commodities, the same advantage which it possesses

in the articles it gives in exchange for them. Thus the countries

which obtain their own productions at least cost, also get their

imports at least cost. 

    This will be made still more obvious if we suppose two

competing countries. England sends cloth to Germany, and gives 10

yards of it for 17 yards of linen, or for something else which in

Germany is the equivalent of those 17 yards. Another country, as

for example France, does the same. The one giving 10 yards of

cloth for a certain quantity of German commodities, so must the

other: if, therefore, in England, these 10 yards are produced by

only half as much labour as that by which they are produced in

France, the linen or other commodities of Germany will cost to

England only half the amount of labour which they will cost to

France. England would thus obtain her imports at less cost than

France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of her labour in

the production of cloth: which might be taken, in the case

supposed, as an approximate estimate of the efficiency of her

labour generally; since France, as well as England, by selecting

cloth as her article of export, would have shown that with her

also it was the commodity in which labour was relatively the most

efficient. It follows, therefore, that every country gets its

imports at less cost, in proportion to the general efficiency of

its labour. 

    This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by Mr.

Senior,(4*) but only as applicable to the importation of the

precious metals. I think it important to point out that the

proposition holds equally true of all other imported commodities;

and further, that it is only a portion of the truth. For, in the

case supposed, the cost to England of the linen which she pays

for with ten yards of cloth, does not depend solely upon the cost

to herself of ten yards of cloth, but partly also upon how many

yards of linen she obtains in exchange for them. What her imports

cost to her is a function of two variables; the quantity of her

own commodities which she gives for them, and the cost of those

commodities. Of these, the last alone depends on the efficiency

of her labour: the first depends on the law of international

values; that is, on the intensity and extensibility of the

foreign demand for her commodities, compared with her demand for

foreign commodities. 

    In the case just now supposed, of a competition between

England and France, the state of international values affected

both competitors alike, since they were supposed to trade with

the same country, and to export and import the same commodities.

The difference, therefore, in what their imports cost them,

depended solely on the other cause, the unequal efficiency of

their labour. They gave the same quantities; the difference could

only be in the cost of production. But if England traded to

Germany with cloth, and France with iron, the comparative demand

in Germany for those two commodities would bear a share in

determining the comparative cost, in labour and capital, with

which England and France would obtain German products. If iron

were more in demand in Germany than cloth, France would recover,

through that channel, part of her disadvantage; if less, her

disadvantage would be increased. The efficiency, therefore, of a

country's labour, is not the only thing which determines even the

cost at which that country obtains imported commodities -- while

it has no share whatever in determining either their exchange

value, or, as we shall presently see, their price. 



NOTES:



1. Supra, book iii, chap. ii. section 4.





2. It may be asked, why we have supposed the number n to have as

its extreme limits, m and 2m (or p/q m)? why may not n be less

than m, or greater than 2m; and if so, what will be the result? 

    This we shall now examine, and when we do so it will appear

that n is always, practically speaking, coded within these

limits. 

    Suppose, for example, that n is less than m; or, reverting to

our former figures, that the million yards of cloth, which

England can make, will not satisfy the whole of Germany's

pre-existing demand; that demand being (let us suppose) for

1,200,000 yards. It would then, at first sight, appear that

England would supply Germany with cloth up to the extent of a

million; that Germany would continue to supply herself with the

remaining 200,000 by home production: that this portion of the

supply would regulate the price of the whole; that England

therefore would be able permanently to sell her million of cloth

at the German cost of production (viz. for two millions of linen)

and would gain the whole advantage of the trade, Germany being no

better off than before. 

    That such, however, would not be the practical result, will

soon be evident. The residuary demand of Germany for 200,000

yards of cloth furnishes a resource to England for purposes of

foreign trade of which it is still her interest to avail herself;

and though she has no more labour and capital which she can

withdraw from linen for the production of this extra quantity of

cloth, there must be some other commodities in which Germany has

a relative advantage over her (though perhaps not so great as in

linen): these she will now import, instead of producing, and the

labour and capital formerly employed in producing them will be

transferred to cloth, until the required amount is made up. If

this transfer just makes up the 200,000 and no more, this

augmented n will now be equal to m; England will sell the whole

1,200,000 at the German values; and will still gain the whole

advantage of the trade. But if the transfer makes up more than

the 200,000, England will have more cloth than 1,200,000 yards to

offer; n will become greater than m, and England must part with

enough of the advantage to induce Germany to take the surplus.

Thus the case which seemed at first sight to be beyond the

limits, is transformed practically into a case either coinciding

with one of the limits or between them. And so with every other

case which can be supposed. 



3. The increase of demand from 800,000 to 900,000, and that from

a million to 1,440,000, are neither equal in themselves, nor bear

an equal proportion to the increase of cheapness. Germany's

demand for cloth has increased one-eighth, while the cheapness is

increased one-fourth. England's demand for linen is creased 44

per cent, while the cheapness is increased 60 per cent.



4. Three Lectures on the Cost of Obtaining Money.


