The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 8

Of the Value of Money, as Dependent on Demand and Supply


    1. It is unfortunate that in the very outset of the subject
we have to clear from our path a formidable ambiguity of
language. The Value of Money is to appearance an expression as
precise, as free from possibility of misunderstanding, as any in
science. The value of a thing, is what it will exchange for: the
value of money, is what money will exchange for; the purchasing
power of money. If prices are low, money will buy much of other
things, and is of high value; if prices are high, it will buy
little of other things, and is of low value. The value of money
is inversely as general prices: falling as they rise, and rising
as they fall. 
    But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the
current language of commerce, in a very different sense. Money,
which is so commonly understood as the synonyme of wealth, is
more especially the term in use to denote it when it is the
subject of borrowing. When one person lends to another, as well
as when he pays wages or rent to another, what he transfers is
not the mere money, but a right to a certain value of the produce
of the country, to be selected at pleasure; the lender having
first bought this right, by giving for it a portion of his
capital. What he really lends is so much capital; the money is
the mere instrument of transfer. But the capital usually passes
from the lender to the receiver through the means either of
money, or of an order to receive money, and at any rate it is in
money that the capital is computed and estimated. Hence,
borrowing capital is universally called borrowing money; the loan
market is called the money market: those who have their capital
disposable for investment on loan are called the monied class:
and the equivalent given for the use of capital, or in other
words, interest, is not only called the interest of money, but,
by a grosser perversion of terms, the value of money. This
misapplication of language, assisted by some fallacious
appearances which we shall notice and clear up hereafter,(1*) has
created a general notion among persons in business, that the
Value of Money, meaning the rate of interest, has an intimate
connexion with the Value of Money in its proper sense, the value
or purchasing power of the circulating medium. We shall return to
this subject before long: at present it is enough to say, that by
Value I shall always mean Exchange Value, and by money the medium
of exchange, not the capital which is passed from hand to hand
through that medium. 

    2. The value or purchasing power of money depends, in the
first instance, on demand and supply. But demand and supply, in
relation to money, present themselves in a somewhat different
shape from the demand and supply of other things.
    The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered for
sale. But it is not usual to speak of offering money for sale.
People are not usually said to buy or sell money. This, however,
is merely an accident of language. In point of fact, money is
bought and sold like other things, whenever other things are
bought and sold for money. Whoever sells corn, or tallow, or
cotton, buys money. Whoever buys bread, or wine, or clothes,
sells money to the dealer in those articles. The money with which
people are offering to buy, is money offered for sale. The supply
of money, then, is the quantity of it which people are wanting to
lay out; that is, all the money they have in their possession,
except what they are hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a
reserve for future contingencies. The supply of money, in short,
is all the money in circulation at the time. 
    The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods
offered for sale. Every seller of goods is a buyer of money, and
the goods he brings with him constitute his demand. The demand
for money differs from the demand for other things in this, that
it is limited only by the means of the purchaser. The demand for
other things is for so much and no more; but there is always a
demand for as much money as can be got. Persons may indeed refuse
to sell, and withdraw their goods from the market, if they cannot
get for them what they consider a sufficient price. But this is
only when they think that the price will rise, and that they
shall get more money by waiting. If they thought the low price
likely to be permanent, they would take what they could get. It
is always a sine qua non with a dealer to dispose of his goods. 
    As the whole of the goods in the market compose the demand
for money, so the whole of the money constitutes the demand for
goods. The money and the goods are seeking each other for the
purpose of being exchanged. They are reciprocally supply and
demand to one another. It is indifferent whether, in
characterizing the phenomena, we speak of the demand and supply
of goods, or the supply and the demand of money. They are
equivalent expressions.
    We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully.
And in doing this, the reader will remark a great difference
between the class of questions which now occupy us, and those
which we previously had under discussion respecting Values. In
considering Value, we were only concerned with causes which acted
upon particular commodities apart from the rest. Causes which
affect all commodities alike, do not act upon values. But in
considering the relation between goods and money, it is with the
causes that operate upon all goods whatever, that we are
specially concerned. We are comparing goods of all sorts on one
side, with money on the other side, as things to be exchanged
against each other. 
    Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an
increase in the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a
foreigner in a place, with a treasure of gold and silver. When he
commences expending it (for this question it matters not whether
productively or unproductively), he adds to the supply of money,
and by the same act, to the demand for goods. Doubtless he adds,
in the first instance, to the demand only for certain kinds of
goods, namely, those which he selects for purchase; he will
immediately raise the price of those, and so far as he is
individually concerned, of those only. If he spends his funds in
giving entertainments, he will raise the prices of food and wine.
If he expends them in establishing a manufactory, he will raise
the prices of labour and materials. But at the higher prices,
more money will pass into the hands of the sellers of these
different articles; and they, whether labourers or dealers,
having more money to lay out, will create an increased demand for
all the things which they are accustomed to purchase: these
accordingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise has
reached everything. I say everything, though it is of course
possible that the influx of money might take place through the
medium of some new class of consumers, or in such a manner as to
alter the proportions of different classes of consumers to one
another, so that a greater share of the national income than
before would thenceforth be expended in some articles, and a
smaller in others; exactly as if a change had taken place in the
tastes and wants of the community. If this were the case, then
until production had accommodated itself to this change in the
comparative demand for different things, there would be a real
alteration in values, and some things would rise in price more
than others, while some perhaps would not rise at all. These
effects, however, would evidently proceed, not from the mere
increase of money, but from accessory circumstances attending it.
We are now only called upon to consider what would be the effect
of an increase of money, considered by itself. Supposing the
money in the hands of individuals to be increased, the wants and
inclinations of the community collectively in respect to
consumption remaining exactly the same; the increase of demand
would reach all things equally, and there would be an universal
rise of prices. We might suppose, with Hume, that some morning,
every person in the nation should wake and find a gold coin in
his pocket: this example, however, would involve an alteration of
the proportions in the demand for different commodities; the
luxuries of the poor would, in the first instance be raised in
price, in a much greater degree than other things. Let us rather
suppose, therefore, that to every pound, or shilling, or penny,
in the possession of any one, another pound, shilling, or penny,
were suddenly added. There would be an increased money demand,
and consequently an increased money value, or price, for things
of all sorts. This increased value would do no good to any one;
would make no difference, except that of having to reckon pounds,
shillings, and pence, in higher numbers. It would be an increase
of values only as estimated in money, a thing only wanted to buy
other things with; and would not enable any one to buy more of
them than before. Prices would have risen in a certain ratio, and
the value of money would have fallen in the same ratio. 
    It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely that
in which the quantity of money had been increased. If the whole
money in circulation was doubled, prices would be doubled. If it
was only increased one-fourth, prices would rise one-fourth.
There would be one-fourth more money, all of which would be used
to purchase goods of some description. When there had been time
for the increased supply of money to reach all markets, or
(according to the conventional metaphor) to permeate all the
channels of circulation, all prices would have risen one-fourth.
But the general rise of price is independent of this diffusing
and equalizing process. Even if some prices were raised more, and
others less, the average rise would be one-fourth. This is a
necessary consequence of the fact, that a fourth more money would
have been given for only the same quantity of goods. General
prices, therefore, would in any case be a fourth higher.
    The very same effect would be produced on prices if we
suppose the goods diminished, instead of the money increased: and
the contrary effect if the goods were increased or the money
diminished. If there were less money in the hands of the
community, and the same amount of goods to be sold, less money
altogether would be given for them, and they would be sold at
lower prices; lower, too, in the precise ratio in which the money
was diminished. So that the value of money, other things being
the same, varies inversely as its quantity; every increase of
quantity lowering the value, and every diminution raising it, in
a ratio exactly equivalent. 
    This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money.
We did not find it to be true of commodities generally, that
every diminution of supply raised the value exactly in proportion
to the deficiency, or that every increase lowered it in the
precise ratio of the excess. Some things are usually affected in
a greater ratio than that of the excess or deficiency, others
usually in a less: because, in ordinary cases of demand, the
desire, being for the thing itself, may be stronger or weaker:
and the amount of what people are willing to expend on it, being
in any case a limited quantity, may be affected in very unequal
degrees by difficulty or facility of attainment. But in the case
of money, which is desired as the means of universal purchase,
the demand consists of everything which people have to sell; and
the only limit to what they are willing to give, is the limit set
by their having nothing more to offer. The whole of the goods
being in any case exchanged for the whole of the money which
comes into the market to be laid out, they will sell for less or
more of it, exactly according as less or more is brought. 

    3. From what precedes, it might for a moment be supposed,
that all the goods on sale in a country at any one time, are
exchanged for all the money existing and in circulation at that
same time: or in other words, that there is always in circulation
in a country, a quantity of money equal in value to the whole of
the goods then and there on sale. But this would be a complete
misapprehension. The money laid out is equal in value to the
goods it purchases; but the quantity of money laid out is not the
same thing with the quantity in circulation. As the money passes
from hand to hand, the same piece of money is laid out many
times, before all the things on sale at one time are purchased
and finally removed from the market: and each pound or dollar
must be counted for as many pounds or dollars, as the number of
times it changes hands in order to effect this object. The
greater part of the goods must also be counted more than once,
not only because most things pass through the hands of several
sets of manufacturers and dealers before they assume the form in
which they are finally consumed, but because in times of
speculation (and all times are so, more or less) the same goods
are often bought repeatedly, to be resold for a profit, before
they are bought for the purpose of consumption at all. 
    If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the number of
times those goods are resold, to be fixed quantities, the value
of money will depend upon its quantity, together with the average
number of times that each piece changes hands in the process. The
whole of the goods sold (counting each resale of the same goods
as so much added to the goods) have been exchanged for the whole
of the money, multiplied by the number of purchases made on the
average by each piece. Consequently, the amount of goods and of
transactions being the same, the value of money is inversely as
its quantity multiplied by what is called the rapidity of
circulation. And the quantity of money in circulation, is equal
to the money value of all the goods sold, divided by the number
which expresses the rapidity of circulation. 
    The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some comment.
It must not be understood to mean, the number of purchases made
by each piece of money in a given time. Time is not the thing to
be considered. The state of society may he such, that each piece
of money hardly performs more than one purchase in a year; but if
this arises from the small number of transactions-from the small
amount of business done, the want of activity in traffic, or
because what traffic there is, mostly takes place by barter -- it
constitutes no reason why prices should be lower, or the value of
money higher. The essential point is, not how often the same
money changes hands in a given time, but how often it changes
hands in order to perform a given amount of traffic. We must
compare the number of purchases made by the money in a given
time, not with the time itself, but with the goods sold in that
same time. If each piece of money changes hands on an average ten
times while goods are sold to the value of a million sterling, it
is evident that the money required to circulate those goods is
100,000l. And conversely, if the money in circulation is
100,000l., and each piece changes hands by the purchase of goods
ten times in a month, the sales of goods for money which take
place every month must amount on the average to 1,000,000l. 
    Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to
express the only thing which it is of any importance to express
by it, and having a tendency to confuse the subject by suggesting
a meaning extremely different from the one intended, it would be
a good thing if the phrase could be got rid of, and another
substituted, more directly significant of the idea meant to be
conveyed. Some such expression as "the efficiency of money,"
though not unexceptionable, would do better; as it would point
attention to the quantity of work done, without suggesting the
idea of estimating it by time. Until an appropriate term can be
devised, we must be content when ambiguity is to be apprehended,
to express the idea by the circumlocution which alone conveys it
adequately, namely, the average number of purchases made by each
piece in order to effect a given pecuniary amount of
transactions. 

    4. The proposition which we have laid down respecting the
dependence of general prices upon the quantity of money in
circulation, must be understood as applying only to a state of
things in which money, that is, gold or silver, is the exclusive
instrument of exchange, and actually passes from hand to hand at
every purchase, credit in any of its shapes being unknown. When
credit comes into play as a means of purchasing, distinct from
money in hand, we shall hereafter find that the connexion between
prices and the amount of the circulating medium is much less
direct and intimate, and that such connexion as does exist, no
longer admits of so simple a mode of expression. But on a subject
so full of complexity as that of currency and prices, it is
necessary to lay the foundation of our theory in a thorough
understanding of the most simple cases, which we shall always
find lying as a groundwork or substratum under those which arise
in practice. That an increase of the quantity of money raises
prices, and a diminution lowers them, is the most elementary
proposition in the theory of currency, and without it we should
have no key to any of the others. In any state of things,
however, except the simple and primitive one which we have
supposed, the proposition is only true other things being the
same: and what those other things are, which must be the same, we
are not yet ready to pronounce. We can, however, point out, even
now, one or two of the cautions with which the principle must be
guarded in attempting to make use of it for the practical
explanation of phenomena; cautions the more indispensable, as the
doctrine, though a scientific truth, has of late years been the
foundation of a greater mass of false theory, and erroneous
interpretation of facts, than any other proposition relating to
interchange. From the time of the resumption of cash payments by
the Act of 1819, and especially since the commercial crisis of
1825, the favourite explanation of every rise or fall of prices
has been "the currency;" and like most popular theories, the
doctrine has been applied with little regard to the conditions
necessary for making it correct. 
    For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there is
a greater amount of money in the country, or in existence, a rise
of prices must necessity follow. But this is by no means an
inevitable consequence. In no commodity is it the quantity in
existence, but the quantity offered for sale, that determines the
value. Whatever may be the quantity of money in the country, only
that part of it will affect prices, which goes into the market of
commodities, and is there actually exchanged against goods.
Whatever increases the amount of this portion of the money in the
country, tends to raise prices. But money hoarded does not act on
prices. Money kept in reserve by individuals to meet
contingencies which do not occur, does not act on prices. The
money in the coffers of the Bank, or retained as a reserve by
private bankers, does not act on prices until drawn out, nor even
then unless drawn out to be expended in commodities. 
    It frequently happens that money, to a considerable amount,
is brought into the country, is there actually invested as
capital, and again flows out, without having ever once acted upon
the markets of commodities, but only upon the market of
securities, or, as it is commonly though improperly called, the
money market. Let us return to the case already put for
illustration, that of a foreigner landing in the country with a
treasure. We supposed him to employ his treasure in the purchase
of goods for his own use, or in setting up a manufactory and
employing labourers; and in either case he would, caeteris
paribus, raise prices. But instead of doing either of these
things, he might very probably prefer to invest his fortune at
interest; which we shall suppose him to do in the most obvious
way, by becoming a competitor for a portion of the stock,
exchequer bills, railway debentures, mercantile bills, mortgages,
&c., which are at all times in the hands of the public. By doing
this he would raise the prices of those different securities, or
in other words would lower the rate of interest; and since this
would disturb the relation previously existing between the rate
of interest on capital in the country itself, and that in foreign
countries, it would probably induce some of those who had
floating capital seeking employment, to send it abroad for
foreign investment rather than buy securities at home at the
advanced price. As much money might thus go out as had previously
come in, while the prices of commodities would have shown no
trace of its temporary presence. This is a case highly deserving
of attention: and it is a fact now beginning to be recognised,
that the passage of the precious metals from country to country
is determined much more than was formerly supposed, by the state
of the loan market in different countries, and much less by the
state of prices. 
    Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid serious
error in the interpretation of mercantile phenomena. If there be,
at any time, an increase in the number of money transactions, a
thing continually liable to happen from differences in the
activity of speculation, and even in the time of year (since
certain kinds of business are transacted only at particular
seasons); an increase of the currency which is only proportional
to this increase of transactions, and is of no longer duration,
has no tendency to raise prices. At the quarterly periods when
the public dividends are paid at the Bank, a sudden increase
takes place of the money in the hands of the public; an increase
estimated at from a fifth to two-fifths of the whole issues of
the Bank of England. Yet this never has any effect on prices; and
in a very few weeks, the currency has again shrunk into its usual
dimensions, by a mere reduction in the demands of the public
(after so copious a supply of ready money) for accommodation from
the Bank in the way of discount or loan. In like manner the
currency of the agricultural districts fluctuates in amount at
different seasons of the year. It is always lowest in August: "it
rises generally towards Christmas, and obtains its greatest
elevation about Lady-day, when the farmer commonly lays in his
stock, and has to pay his rent and summer taxes," and when he
therefore makes his principal applications to country bankers for
loans. "Those variations occur with the same regularity as the
season, and with just as little disturbance of the markets as the
quarterly fluctuations of the notes of the Bank of England. As
soon as the extra payments have been completed, the superfluous"
currency, which is estimated at half a million, "as certainly and
immediately is reabsorbed and disappears." (2*)
    If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these extra
payments, one of three things must happen. Either the payments
must be made without money, by a resort to some of those
contrivances by which its use is dispensed with; or there must be
an increase in the rapidity of circulation, the same sum of money
being made to perform more payments; or if neither of these
things took place, money to make the extra payments must be
withdrawn from the market for commodities, and prices,
consequently, must fall. An increase of the circulating medium,
conformable in extent and duration to the temporary stress of
business, does not raise prices, but merely prevents this fall. 
    The sequel of our investigation will point out many other
qualifications with which the proposition must be received, that
the value of the circulating medium depends on the demand and
supply, and is in the inverse ratio of the quantity;
qualifications which, under a complex system of credit like that
existing in England, render the proposition an extremely
incorrect expression of the fact. 

NOTES:

1. Infra, chap. xxiii.

2. Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd edit., pp.
87-9.

