The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 15

Of a Measure of Value


    1. There has been much discussion among political economists
respecting a Measure of Value. An importance has been attached to
the subject, greater than it deserved, and what has been written
respecting it has contributed not a little to the reproach of
logomachy, which is brought, with much exaggeration, but not
altogether without ground, against the speculations of political
economists. It is necessary however to touch upon the subject, if
only to show how little there is to be said on it. 
    A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word
measure, would mean, something, by comparison with which we may
ascertain what is the value of any other thing. When we consider
farther, that value itself is relative, and that two things are
necessary to constitute it, independently of the third thing
which is to measure it; we may define a Measure of Value to be
something, by comparing with which any two other things, we may
infer their value in relation to one another. 
    In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of value
at a given time and place; since we can always infer the
proportion in which things exchange for one another, when we know
the proportion in which each exchanges for any third thing. To
serve as a convenient measure of value is one of the functions of
the commodity selected as a medium of exchange. It is in that
commodity that the values of all other things are habitually
estimated. We say that one thing is worth 2l., another 3l.; and
it is then known without express statement, that one is worth
two-thirds of the other, or that the things exchange for one
another in the proportion of 2 to 3. Money is a complete measure
of their value.
    But the desideratum sought by political economists is not a
measure of the value of things at the same time and place, but a
measure of the value of the same thing at different times and
places: something by comparison with which it may be known
whether any given thing is of greater or less value now than a
century ago, or in this country than in America or China. And for
this also, money, or any other commodity, will serve quite as
well as at the same time and place, provided we can obtain the
same data; provided we are able to compare with the measure not
one commodity only, but the two or more which are necessary to
the idea of value. If wheat is now 40s. the quarter, and a fat
sheep the same, and if in the time of Henry the Second wheat was
20s., and a sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat was then
worth two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that the value
therefore of a sheep, estimated in wheat, is twice as great as it
was then; quite independently of the value of money at the two
periods, either in relation to those two articles (in respect to
both of which we suppose it to have fallen), or to other
commodities, in respect to which we need not make any
supposition. 
    What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the subject,
is some means of ascertaining the value of a commodity by merely
comparing it with the measure, without referring it specially to
any other given commodity. They would wish to be able, from the
mere fact that wheat is now 40s. the quarter, and was formerly
20s., to decide whether wheat has varied in its value, and in
what degree, without selecting a second commodity, such as a
sheep, to compare it with; because they are desirous of knowing,
not how much wheat has varied in value relatively to sheep, but
how much it has varied relatively to things in general. 
    The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness
of the idea of general exchange value -- value in relation not to
some one commodity, but to commodities at large. Even if we knew
exactly how much a quarter of wheat would have purchased at the
earlier period, of every marketable article considered
separately, and that it will now purchase more of some things and
less of others, we should often find it impossible to say whether
it had risen or fallen in relation to things in general. How much
more impossible, when we only know how it has varied in relation
to the measure. To enable the money price of a thing at two
different periods to measure the quantity of things in general
which it will exchange for, the same sum of money must correspond
at both periods to the same quantity of things in general, that
is, money must always have the same exchange value, the same
general purchasing power. Now, not only is this not true of
money, or of any other commodity, but we cannot even suppose any
state of circumstances in which it would be true. 

    2. A measure of exchange value, therefore, being impossible,
writers have formed a notion of something, under the name of a
measure of value, which would be more properly termed a measure
of cost of production. They have imagined a commodity invariably
produced by the same quantity of labour; to which supposition it
is necessary to add, that the fixed capital employed in the
production must bear always the same proportion to the wages of
the immediate labour, and must be always of the same durability:
in short, the same capital must be advanced for the same length
of time, so that the element of value which consists of profits,
as well as that which consists of wages, may be unchangeable. We
should then have a commodity always produced under one and the
same combination of all the circumstances which affect permanent
value. Such a commodity would be by no means constant in its
exchange value; for (even without reckoning the temporary
fluctuations arising from supply and demand) its exchange value
would be altered by every change in the circumstances of
production of the things against which it was exchanged. But if
there existed such a commodity, we should derive this advantage
from it, that whenever any other thing varied permanently in
relation to it, we should know that the cause of variation was
not in it, but in the other thing. It would thus be suited to
serve as a measure, not indeed of the value of other things, but
of their cost of production. If a commodity acquired a greater
permanent purchasing power in relation to the invariable
commodity, its cost of production must have become greater; and
in the contrary case, less. This measure of cost, is what
political economists have generally meant by a measure of value. 
    But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can no
more exist in fact, than a measure of exchange value. There is no
commodity which is invariable in its cost of production. Gold and
silver are the least variable, but even these are liable to
changes in their cost of production, from the exhaustion of old
sources of supply, the discovery of new, and improvements in the
mode of working. If we attempt to ascertain the changes in the
cost of production of any commodity from the changes in its money
price, the conclusion will require to be corrected by the best
allowance we can make for the intermediate changes in the cost of
the production of money itself. 
    Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities peculiarly
fitted to serve as a measure of value: corn, and labour. Of corn,
he said that although its value fluctuates much from year to
year, it does not vary greatly from century to century. This we
now know to be an error: corn tends to rise in cost of production
with every increase of population, and to fall with every
improvement in agriculture, either in the country itself, or in
any foreign country from which it draws a portion of its
supplies. The supposed constancy of the cost of the production of
corn depends on the maintenance of a complete equipoise between
these antagonizing forces, an equipoise which, if ever realized,
can only be accidental. With respect to labour as a measure of
value, the language of Adam Smith is not uniform. He sometimes
speaks of it as a good measure only for short periods, saying
that the value of labour (or wages) does not vary much from year
to year, though it does from generation to generation. On other
occasions he speaks as if labour were intrinsically the most
proper measure of value, on the ground that one day's ordinary
muscular exertion of one man, may be looked upon as always, to
him, the same amount of effort or sacrifice. But this
proposition, whether in itself admissible or not, discards the
idea of exchange value altogether, substituting a totally
different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day's labour
will purchase in America twice as much of ordinary consumable
articles as in England, it seems a vain subtlety to insist on
saying that labour is of the same value in both countries, and
that it is the value of the other things which is different.
Labour, in this case, may be correctly said to be twice as
valuable, both in the market and to the labourer himself, in
America as in England. 
    If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by which
to estimate value in use, perhaps nothing better could be chosen
than one day's subsistence of an average man, reckoned in the
ordinary food consumed by the class of unskilled labourers. If in
any country a pound of maize flour will support a labouring man
for a day, a thing might be deemed more or less valuable in
proportion to the number of pounds of maize flour it exchanged
for. If one thing, either by itself or by what it would purchase,
could maintain a labouring man for a day, and another could
maintain him for a week, there would be some reason in saying
that the one was worth, for ordinary human uses, seven times as
much as the other. But this would not measure the worth of the
thing to its possessor for his own purposes, which might be
greater to any amount, though it could not be less, than the
worth of the food which the thing would purchase. 
    The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded with
the idea of the regulator, or determining principle, of value.
When it is said by Ricardo and others, that the value of a thing
is regulated by quantity of labour, they do not mean the quantity
of labour for which the thing will exchange, but the quantity
required for producing it. This, they mean to affirm, determines
its value; causes it to be of the value it is, and of no other.
But when Adam Smith and Malthus say that labour is a measure of
value, they do not mean the labour by which the thing was or can
be made, but the quantity of labour which it will exchange for,
or purchase; in other words the value of the thing, estimated in
labour. And they do not mean that this regulates the general
exchange value of the thing, or has any effect in determining
what that value shall be, but only ascertains what it is, and
whether and how much it varies from time to time and from place
to place. To confound these two ideas, would be much the same
thing as to overlook the distinction between the thermometer and
the fire. 

