


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 3: Distribution



Chapter 24



Of the Regulation of a Convertible Paper Currency





    1. The frequent recurrence during the last half century of

the painful series of phenomena called a commercial crisis, has

directed much of the attention both of economists and of

practical politicians to the contriving of expedients for

averting, or at the least, mitigating its evils. And the habit

which grew up during the era of the Bank restriction, of

ascribing all alternations of high and low prices to the issues

of banks, has caused inquirers in general to fix their hopes of

success in moderating those vicissitudes, upon schemes for the

regulation of bank notes. A scheme of this nature, after having

obtained the sanction of high authorities, so far established

itself in the public mind, as to be, with general approbation,

converted into a law, at the renewal of the Charter of the Bank

of England in 1844: and the regulation is still in force, though

with a great abatement of its popularity, and with its prestige

impaired by three temporary suspensions, on the responsibility of

the executive, the earliest little more than three years after

its enactment. It is proper that the merits of this plan for the

relation of a convertible bank note currency should be here

considered. Before touching upon the practical provisions of Sir

Robert Peel's Act of 1844, I shall briefly state the nature, and

examine the grounds, of the theory on which it is founded. 

    It is believed by many, that banks of issue universally, or

the Bank of England in particular, have a power of throwing their

notes into circulation, and thereby raising prices, arbitrarily;

that this power is only limited by the degree of moderation with

which they think fit to exercise it; that when they increase

their issues beyond the usual mount, the rise of prices, thus

produced, generates a spirit of speculation in commodities, which

carries prices still higher, and ultimately causes a reaction and

recoil, mounting in extreme cases to a commercial crisis; and

that every such crisis which has occurred in this country within

mercantile memory, has been either originally produced by this

cause, or greatly aggravated by it. To this extreme length the

currency theory has not been carried by the eminent political

economists who have given to a more moderate form of the same

theory the sanction of their names. But I have not overstated the

extravagance of the popular version; which is a remarkable

instance to what lengths a favourite theory will hurry, not the

closet students whose competency in such questions is often

treated with so much contempt, but men of the world and of

business, who pique themselves on the practical knowledge which

they have at least had ample opportunities of acquiring. Not only

has this fixed idea of the currency as the prime agent in the

fluctuations of price, made them shut their eyes to the multitude

of circumstances which, by influencing the expectation of supply,

are the true causes of almost all speculations, and of almost all

fluctuations of price; but in order to bring about the

chronological agreement required by their theory, between the

variations of bank issues and those of prices, they have played

such fantastic tricks with facts and dates as would be thought

incredible, if an eminent practical authority ad not taken the

trouble of meeting them, on the ground of mere history, with an

elaborate exposure. I refer, as all conversant with the subject

must be aware, to Mr Tooke's History of Prices. The result of Mr

Tooke's investigations was thus stated by himself, in his

examination before the Commons' Committee on the Bank Charter

question in 1832; and the evidences of it stand recorded in his

book: "In point of fact, and historically, as far as my

researches have gone, in every signal instance of a rise or fall

of prices, the rise or fall has preceded, and therefore could not

be the effect of, an enlargement or contraction of the bank

circulation."

    The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing

almost every rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or

contraction of the issues of bank notes, has raised up, by

reaction, a theory the extreme opposite of the former, of which,

in scientific discussion, the most prominent representatives are

Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton. This counter-theory denies to bank

notes, so long as their convertibility is maintained, any power

whatever of raising prices, and to banks any power of increasing

their circulation, except as a consequence of, and in proportion

to, an increase of the business to be done. This last statement

is supported by the unanimous assurances of all the country

bankers who have been examined before successive Parliamentary

Committees on the subject. They all bear testimony that (in the

words of Mr Fullarton(1*)) "the amount of their issues is

exclusively regulated by the extent of local dealings and

expenditure in their respective districts, fluctuating with the

fluctuations of production and price, and that they neither can

increase their issues beyond the limits which the range of such

dealings and expenditure prescribes, without the certainty of

having their notes immediately returned to them, nor diminish

them, but at an almost equal certainty of the vacancy being

filled up from some other source." from these premises it is

argued by Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton, that bank issues, since they

cannot be increased in amount unless there be an increased

demand, cannot possibly raise prices; cannot encourage

speculation, nor occasion a commercial crisis; and that the

attempt to guard against that evil by an artificial management of

the issue of notes, is of no effect for the intended purpose, and

liable to produce other consequences extremely calamitous. 



    2. As much of this doctrine as rests upon testimony, and not

upon inference, appears to me incontrovertible. I give complete

credence to the assertion of the country bankers, very clearly

and correctly condensed into a small compass in the sentence just

quoted from Mr Fullarton. I am convinced that they cannot

possibly increase their issue of notes in any other circumstances

than those which are there stated. I believe, also, that the

theory, grounded by Mr Fullarton upon this fact, contains a large

portion of truth, and is far nearer to being the expression of

the whole truth than any form whatever of the currency theory. 

    There are two states of the markets: one which may be termed

the quiescent state, the other the expectant, or speculative

state. The first is that in which there is nothing tending to

engender in any considerable portion of the mercantile public a

desire to extend their operations. The producers produce and the

dealers purchase only their usual stocks, having no expectation

of a more than usually rapid vent for them. Each person transacts

his ordinary amount of business, and no more; or increases it

only in correspondence with the increase of his capital or

connexion, or with the gradual growth of the demand for his

commodity, occasioned by the public prosperity. Not meditating

any unusual extension of their own operations, producers and

dealers do not need more than the usual accommodation from

bankers and other money lenders; and as it is only by extending

their loans that bankers increase their issues, none but a

momentary augmentation of issues is in these circumstances

possible. If at a certain time of the year a portion of the

public have larger payments to make than at other times, or if an

individual, under some peculiar exigency, requires an extra

advance, they may apply for more bank notes, and obtain them; but

the notes will no more remain in circulation, than the extra

quantity of Bank of England notes which are issued once in every

three months in payment of the dividends. The person to whom,

after being borrowed, the notes are paid away, has no extra

payments to make, and no peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by

him unused, or sends them into deposit, or repays with them a

previous advance made to him by some banker: in any case he does

not buy commodities with them, since by the supposition there is

nothing to induce him to lay in a larger stock of commodities

than before. Even if we suppose, as we may do, that bankers

create an artificial increase of the demand for loans by offering

them below the market rate of interest, the notes they issue will

not remain in circulation; for when the borrower, having

completed the transaction for which he availed himself of them,

has paid them away, the creditor or dealer who receives them,

having no demand for the immediate use of an extra quantity of

notes, sends them into deposit. In this case, therefore, there

can be no addition, at the discretion of bankers, to the general

circulating medium: any increase of their issues either comes

back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the public, and no

rise takes place in prices. 

    But there is another state of the markets, strikingly

contrasted with the preceding, and to this state it is not so

obvious that the theory of Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton is

applicable; namely, when an impression prevails, whether well

founded or groundless, that the supply of one or more great

articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the ordinary

consumption. In such circumstances all persons connected with

those commodities desire to extend their operations. The

producers or importers desire to produce or import a larger

quantity, speculators desire to lay in a stock in order to profit

by the expected rise of price, and holders of the commodity

desire additional advances to enable them to continue holding.

All these classes are disposed to make a more than ordinary use

of their credit, and to this desire it is not denied that bankers

very often unduly administer. Effects of the same kind may be

produced by anything which, exciting more than usual hopes of

profit, gives increased briskness to business. for example, a

sudden foreign demand for commodities on a large scale, or the

expectation of it; such as occurred on the opening of Spanish

America to English trade, and has occurred on various occasions

in the trade with the United States. Such occurrences produce a

tendency to a rise of price in exportable articles, and generate

speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and (as long as a large

proportion of men in business prefer excitement to safety)

frequently of an irrational or immoderate character. In such

cases there is a desire in the mercantile classes, or in some

portion of them, to employ their credit, in a more than usual

degree, as a power of purchasing. This is a state of business

which, when pushed to an extreme length, brings on the revulsion

called a commercial crisis; and it is a known fact that such

periods of speculation hardly ever pass off without having been

attended, during some part of their progress, by a considerable

increase of bank notes. 

    To this, however, it is replied by Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton,

that the increase of the circulation always follows instead of

preceding the rise of prices, and is not its cause, but its

effect. That in the first place, the speculative purchases by

which prices are raised, are not effected by bank notes but by

cheques, or still more commonly on a simple book credit: and

secondly, even if they were made with bank notes borrowed for

that express purpose from bankers, the notes, after being used

for that purpose, would, if not wanted for current transactions,

be returned into deposit by the persons receiving them. In this I

fully concur, and I regard it as proved, both scientifically and

historically, that during the ascending period of speculation,

and as long as it is confined to transactions between dealers,

the issues of bank notes are seldom materially increased, nor

contribute anything to the speculative rise of prices. It seems

to me, however, that this can no longer be affirmed when

speculation has proceeded so far as to reach the producers.

Speculative orders given by merchants to manufacturers induce

them to extend their operations, and to become applicants to

bankers for increased advances, which if made in notes, are not

paid away to persons who return them into deposit, but are

partially expended in paying wages, and pass into the various

channels of retail trade, where they become directly effective in

producing a further rise of prices. I cannot but think that this

employment of bank notes must have been powerfully operative on

prices at the time when notes of one and two pounds value were

permitted by law. Admitting, however, that the prohibition of

notes below five pounds has now rendered this part of their

operation comparatively insignificant by greatly limiting their

applicability to the payment of wages, there is another form of

their instrumentality which comes into play in the latter stages

of speculation, and which forms the principal argument of the

more moderate supporters of the currency theory. Though advances

by bankers are seldom demanded for the purpose of buying on

speculation, they are largely demanded by unsuccessful

speculators for the purpose of holding on; and the competition of

these speculators for a share of the loanable capital, makes even

those who have not speculated, more dependent than before on

bankers for the advances they require. Between the ascending

period of speculation and the revulsion, there is an interval

extending to weeks and sometimes months, of struggling against a

fall. The tide having shown signs of turning, the speculative

holders are unwilling to sell in a falling market, and in the

meantime they require funds to enable them to fulfil even their

ordinary engagements. It is this stage that is ordinarily marked

by a considerable increase in the amount of the banknote

circulation. That such an increase does usually take place, is

denied by no one. And I think it must be admitted that this

increase tends to prolong the duration of the speculations; that

it enables the speculative prices to be kept up for some time

after they would otherwise have collapsed; and therefore prolongs

and increases the drain of the precious metals for exportation,

which is a leading feature of this stage in the progress of a

commercial crisis: the continuance of which drain at last

endangering the power of the banks to fulfil their engagement of

paying their notes on demand, they are compelled to contract

their credit more suddenly and severely than would have been

necessary if they had been prevented from propping up speculation

by increased advances, after the time when the recoil had become

inevitable. 



    3. To prevent this retardation of the recoil, and ultimate

aggravation of its severity, is the object of the scheme for

regulating the currency, of which Lord Overstone, Mr Norman, and

Colonel Torrens, were the first promulgators, and which has, in a

slightly modified form, been enacted into law.(2*)

    According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue of

promissory notes for circulation was to be confined to one body.

In the form adopted by Parliament, all existing issuers were

permitted to retain this privilege, but none were to be hereafter

admitted to it, even in the place of those who might discontinue

their issues: and, for all except the Bank of England, a maximum

of issues was prescribed, on a scale intentionally low. To the

Bank of England no maximum was fixed for the aggregate amount of

its notes, but only for the portion issued on securities, or in

other words, on loan. These were never to exceed a certain limit,

fixed in the first instance at fourteen millions.(3*) All issues

beyond that amount must be in exchange for bullion; of which the

Bank is bound to purchase, at a trifle below the Mint valuation,

any quantity which is offered to it, giving its notes in

exchange. In regard, therefore, to any issue of notes beyond the

limit of fourteen millions, the Bank is purely passive, having no

function but the compulsory one of giving its notes for gold at

3l. 17s. 9d., and gold for its notes at 3l. 17s. 10 1/2d.,

whenever and by whomsoever it is called upon to do so. 

    The object for which this mechanism is intended is, that the

bank-note currency may vary in its amount at the exact times, and

in the exact degree, in which a purely metallic currency would

vary. And the precious metals being the commodity that has

hitherto approached nearest to that invariability in all the

circumstances influencing value, which fits a commodity for being

adopted as a medium of exchange, it seems to be thought that the

excellence of the Act of 1844 is fully made out, if under its

operation the issues conform in all their variations of quantity,

and therefore, as is inferred, of value, to the variations which

would take place in a currency wholly metallic. 

    Now, all reasonable opponents of the Act, in common with its

supporters, acknowledge as an essential requisite of any

substitute for the precious metals, that it should conform

exactly in its permanent value to a metallic standard. And they

say, that so long as it is convertible into specie on demand, it

does and must so conform. But when the value of a metallic or of

any other currency is spoken of, there are two points to be

considered; the permanent or average value, and the fluctuations.

It is to the permanent value of a metallic currency, that the

value of a paper currency ought to conform. But there is no

obvious reason why it should be required to conform to the

fluctuations too. The only object of its conforming at all, is

steadiness of value; and with respect to fluctuations the sole

thing desirable is that they should be the smallest possible. Now

the fluctuations in the value of the currency are determined, not

by its quantity, whether it consist of gold or of paper, but by

the expansions and contractions of credit. To discover,

therefore, what currency will conform the most nearly to the

permanent value of the precious metals, we must find under what

currency the variations in credit are least frequent and least

extreme. Now, whether this object is best attained by a metallic

currency (and therefore by a paper currency exactly conforming in

quantity to it) is precisely the question to be decided. If it

should prove that a paper currency which follows all the

fluctuations in quantity of a metallic, leads to more violent

revulsions of credit than one which is not held to this rigid

conformity, it will follow that the currency which agrees most

exactly in quantity with a metallic currency is not that which

adheres closest to its value; that is to say, its permanent

value, with which alone agreement is desirable. 

    Whether this is really the case or not we will now inquire.

And first, let us consider whether the Act effects the practical

object chiefly relied on in its defence by the more sober of its

advocates, that of arresting speculative extensions of credit at

an earlier period, with a less drain of gold, and consequently by

a milder and more gradual process. I think it must be admitted

that to a certain degree it is successful in this object. 

    I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged, in

opposition to this opinion. It may be said, that when the time

arrives at which the banks are pressed for increased advances to

enable speculators to fulfil their engagements, a limitation of

the issue of notes will not prevent the banks, if otherwise

willing, from making these advances; that they have still their

deposits as a source from which loans may be made beyond the

point which is consistent with prudence as bankers; and that even

if they refused to do so, the only effect would be, that the

deposits themselves would be drawn out to supply the wants of the

depositors; which would be just as much an addition to the bank

notes and coin in the hands of the public, as if the notes

themselves were increased. This is true, and is a sufficient

answer to those who think that the advances of banks to prop up

failing speculations are objectionable chiefly as an increase of

the currency. But the mode in which they are really

objectionable, is as an extension of credit. If, instead of

increasing their discounts, the banks allow their deposits to be

drawn out, there is the same increase of currency (for a short

time at least), but there is not an increase of loans, at the

time when there ought to be a diminution. If they do increase

their discounts, not by means of notes, but at the expense of the

deposits alone, their deposits (properly so called) are definite

and exhaustible, while notes may be increased to any amount, or,

after being returned, may be re-issued without limit. It is true

that a bank, if willing to add indefinitely to its liabilities,

has the power of making its nominal deposits as unlimited a fund

as its issues could be; it has only to make its advances in a

book credit, which is creating deposits out of its own

liabilities, the money for which it has made itself responsible

becoming a deposit in its hands, to be drawn against by cheques;

and the cheques when drawn may be liquidated (either at the same

bank or at the clearing house) without the aid of notes, by a

mere transfer of credit from one account to another. I apprehend

it is chiefly in this way that undue extensions of credit, in

periods of speculation, are commonly made. But the banks are not

likely to persist in this course when the tide begins to turn. It

is not when their deposits have already begun to flow out, that

they are likely to create deposit accounts which represent,

instead of funds placed in their hands, fresh liabilities of

their own. But experience proves that extension of credit, when

in the form of notes, goes on long after the recoil from

over-speculation has commenced. When this mode of resisting the

revulsion is made impossible, and deposits and book credits are

left as the only sources from which undue advances can be made,

the rate of interest is not so often, or so long, prevented from

rising, after the difficulties consequent on excess of

speculation begin to be felt. On the contrary, the necessity

which the banks feel of diminishing their advances to maintain

their solvency, when they find their deposits flowing out, and

cannot supply the vacant place by their own notes, accelerates

the rise of the rate of interest. Speculative holders are

therefore obliged to submit earlier to that loss by resale, which

could not have been prevented from coming on them at last: the

recoil of prices and collapse of general credit take place

sooner. 

    To appreciate the effects which this acceleration of the

crisis has in mitigating its intensity, let us advert more

particularly to the nature and effects of that leading feature in

the period just preceding the collapse, the drain of gold. A rise

of prices produced by a speculative extension of credit, even

when bank notes have not been the instrument, is not the less

effectual (if it lasts long enough) in turning the exchanges: and

when the exchanges have turned from this cause, they can only be

turned back, and the drain of gold stopped, either by a fall of

prices or by a rise of the rate of interest. A fall of prices

will stop it by removing the cause which produced it, and by

rendering goods a more advantageous remittance than gold, even

for paying debts already due. A rise of the rate of interest, and

consequent fall of the prices of securities, will accomplish the

purpose still more rapidly, by inducing foreigners, instead of

taking away the gold which is due to them, to leave it for

investment within the country, and even send gold into the

country to take advantage of the increased rate of interest. Of

this last mode of stopping a drain of gold, the year 1847

afforded signal examples. But until one of these two things takes

place until either prices fall, or the rate of interest

rises-nothing can possibly arrest, or even moderate, the efflux

of gold. Now, neither will prices fall nor interest rise, so long

as the unduly expanded credit is upheld by the continued advances

of bankers. It is well known that when a drain of gold has set

in, even if bank notes have not increased in quantity, it is upon

them that the contraction first falls, the gold wanted for

exportation being always obtained from the Bank of England in

exchange for its notes. But under the system which preceded 1844,

the Bank of England, being subjected, in common with other banks,

to the importunities for fresh advances which are characteristic

of such a time, could, and often did, immediately re-issue the

notes which had been returned to it in exchange for bullion. It

is a great error, certainly, to suppose that the mischief of this

re-issue chiefly consisted in preventing a contraction of the

currency. It was, however, quite as mischievous as it has ever

been supposed to be. As long as it lasted, the efflux of gold

could not cease, since neither would prices fall nor interest

rise while these advances continued. Prices, having risen without

any increase of bank notes, could well have fallen without a

diminution of them; but having risen in consequence of an

extension of credit, they could not fall without a contraction of

it. As long, therefore, as the Bank of England and the other

banks persevered in this course, so long gold continued to flow

out, until so little was left that the Bank of England, being in

danger of suspension of payments, was compelled at last to

contract its discounts so greatly and suddenly as to produce a

much more extreme variation in the rate of interest, inflict much

greater loss and distress on individuals, and destroy a much

greater amount of the ordinary credit of the country, than any

real necessity required. 

    I acknowledge, (and the experience of 1847 has proved to

those who overlooked it before,) that the mischief now described,

may be wrought, and in large measure, by the Bank of England,

through its deposits alone. It may continue or even increase its

discounts and advances, when it ought to contract them: with the

ultimate effect of making the contraction much more severe and

sudden than necessary. I cannot but think, however, that banks

which commit this error with their deposits, would commit it

still more if they were at liberty to make increased loans with

their issues as well as their deposits. I am compelled to think

that the being restricted from increasing their issues, is a real

impediment to their making those advances which arrest the tide

at its turn, and make it rush like a torrent afterwards.. and

when the Act is blamed for interposing obstacles at a time when

not obstacles but facilities are needed, it must in justice

receive credit for interposing them when they are an acknowledged

benefit. In this particular, therefore, I think it cannot be

denied, that the new system is a real improvement upon the old.



    4. But however this may be, it seems to me certain that these

advantages, whatever value may be put on them, are purchased by

still greater disadvantages. In the first place, a large

extension of credit by bankers, though most hurtful when, credit

being already in an inflated state, it can only serve to retard

and aggravate the collapse, is most salutary when the collapse

has come, and when credit instead of being in excess is in

distressing deficiency, and increased advances by bankers,

instead of being an addition to the ordinary amount of floating

credit, serve to replace a mass of other credit which has been

suddenly destroyed. Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank of England

occasionally aggravated the severity of a commercial revulsion by

rendering the collapse of credit more tardy and hence more

violent than necessary, it in return rendered invaluable services

during the revulsion itself, by coming forward with advances to

support solvent firms, at a time when all other paper and almost

all mercantile credit had become comparatively valueless. This

service was eminently conspicuous in the crisis of 1825-6, the

severest probably ever experienced; during which the Bank

increased what is called its circulation by many millions, in

advances to those mercantile firms of whose ultimate solvency it

felt no doubt; advances which if it had been obliged to withhold,

the severity of the crisis would have been still greater than it

was. If the Bank, it is justly remarked by Mr Fullarton, (4*)

complies with such applications, "it must comply with them by an

issue of notes, for notes constitute the only instrumentality

through which the Bank is in the practice of lending its credit.

But those notes are not intended to circulate, nor do they

circulate. There is no more demand for circulation than there was

before. On the contrary, the rapid decline of prices which the

case in supposition presumes, would necessarily contract the

demand for circulation. The notes would either be returned to the

Bank of England, as fast as they were issued, in the shape of

deposits, or would be locked up in the drawers of the private

London bankers, or distributed by them to their correspondents in

the country, or intercepted by other capitalists, who, during the

fervour of the previous excitement, had contracted liabilities

which they might be imperfectly prepared on the sudden to

encounter. In such emergencies, every man connected with

business, who has been trading on other means than his own, is

placed on the defensive, and his whole object is to make himself

as strong as possible, an object which cannot be more effectually

answered than by keeping by him as large a reserve as possible in

paper which the law has made a legal tender. The notes themselves

never find their way into the produce market; and if they at all

contribute to retard" (or, as I should rather say, to moderate)

"the fall of prices, it is not by promoting in the slightest

degree the effective demand for commodities, not by enabling

consumers to buy more largely for consumption, and so giving

briskness to commerce, but by a process exactly the reverse, by

enabling the holders of commodities to hold on, by obstructing

traffic and repressing consumption."

    The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the

excessive contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion, is

consistent with the principle of the new system; for an

extraordinary contraction of credit, and fall of prices,

inevitably draw gold into the country, and the principle of the

system is that the bank-note currency shall be permitted, and

even compelled, to enlarge itself, in all cases in which a

metallic currency would do the same. But, what the principle of

the law would encourage, its provisions in this instance

preclude, by not suffering the increased issues to take place

until the gold has actually arrived: which is never until the

worst part of the crisis has passed, and almost all the losses

and failures attendant on it are consummated. The machinery of

the system withholds, until for many purposes it comes too late,

the very medicine which the theory of the system prescribes as

the appropriate remedy.(5*)

    This function of banks in filling up the gap made in

mercantile credit by the consequences of undue speculation and

its revulsion, is so entirely indispensable, that if the Act of

1844 continues unrepealed, there can be no difficulty in

foreseeing that its provisions must be suspended, as they were in

1847, in every period of great commercial difficulty, as soon as

the crisis has really and completely set in.(6*) Were this all,

there would be no absolute inconsistency in maintaining the

restriction as a means of preventing a crisis, and relaxing it

for the purpose of relieving one. But there is another objection,

of a still more radical and comprehensive character, to the new

system. 

    Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency shall

vary in its amount in exact conformity to the variations of a

metallic currency, it provides, in fact, that in every case of an

efflux of gold, a corresponding diminution shall take place in

the quantity of bank notes; in other words, that every

exportation of the precious metals shall be virtually drawn from

the circulation; it being assumed that this would be the case if

the currency were wholly metallic. This theory, and these

practical arrangements, are adapted to the case in which the

drain of gold originates in a rise of prices produced by an undue

expansion of currency or credit; but they are adapted to no case

beside. 

    When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of

effects arising from an increase of the currency, or from an

expansion of credit tantamount in its effect on prices to an

increase of currency, it is in that case a fair assumption that

in a purely metallic system the gold exported would be drawn from

the currency itself; because such a drain, being in its nature

unlimited, will necessarily continue as long as currency and

credit are undiminished. But an exportation of the precious metis

often arises from no causes affecting currency or credit, but

simply from an unusual extension of foreign payments, arising

either from the state of the markets for commodities, or from

some circumstance not commercial. In this class of causes, four,

of powerful operation, are included, of each of which the last

fifty years of English history afford repeated instances. The

first is that of an extraordinary foreign expenditure by

government, either political or military. as in the revolutionary

war, and, as long as it lasted, during the Crimean war. The

second is the case of a large exportation of capital for foreign

investment; such as the loans and mining operations which partly

contributed to the crisis of 1825, and the American speculations

which were the principal cause of the crisis of 1839. The third

is a failure of crops in the countries which supply the raw

material of important manufactures; such as the cotton failure in

America, which compelled England, in 1847, to incur unusual

liabilities for the purchase of that commodity at an advanced

price. The fourth is a bad harvest, and a great consequent

importation of food; of which the years 1846 and 1847 presented

an example surpassing all antecedent experience. 

    In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic, would

the gold or silver exported for the purposes in question be

necessarily, or even probably, drawn wholly from the circulation.

It would be drawn from the hoards, which under a metallic

currency always exist to a very large amount; in uncivilized

countries, in the hands of all who can afford it; in civilized

countries chiefly in the form of bankers' reserves. Mr Tooke, in

his "Inquiry into the Currency Principle," bears testimony to

this fact; but it is to Mr Fullarton that the public are indebted

for the clearest and most satisfactory elucidation of it. As I am

not aware that this part of the theory of currency has been set

forth by any other writer with anything like the same degree of

completeness, I shall quote somewhat largely from this able

production. 

    "No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country, where

hoarding is carried on to a far larger extent in proportion to

the existing stock of wealth, and where the practice has become

much more deeply engrafted in the habits of the people, by

traditionary apprehensions of insecurity and the difficulty of

finding safe and remunerative investments, than in any European

community -- no person who has had personal experience of this

state of society, can be at a loss to recollect innumerable

instances of large metallic treasures extracted in times of

pecuniary difficulty from the coffers of individuals by the

temptation of a high rate of interest, and brought in aid of the

public necessities, nor, on the other hand, of the facility with

which those treasures have been absorbed again, when the

inducements which had drawn them into light were no longer in

operation. In countries more advanced in civilization and wealth

than the Asiatic principalities, and where no man is in fear of

attracting the cupidity of power by an external display of

riches, but where the interchange of commodities is still almost

universally conducted through the medium of a metric circulation,

as is the case with most of the commercial countries on the

Continent of Europe, the motives for amassing the precious metals

may be less powerful than in the majority of Asiatic

principalities; but the ability to accumulate being more widely

extended, the absolute quantity amassed will be found probably to

bear a considerably larger proportion to the population.(7*) In

those states which lie exposed to hostile invasion, or whose

social condition is unsettled and menacing, the motive indeed

must still be very strong; and in a nation carrying on an

extensive commerce, both foreign and internal, without any

considerable aid from any of the banking substitutes for money,

the reserves of gold and silver indispensably required to secure

the regularity of payments, must of themselves engross a share of

the circulating coin which it would not be easy to estimate. 

    "In this country, where the banking system has been carried

to an extent and perfection unknown in any other part of Europe,

and may be said to have entirely superseded the use of coin,

except for retail dealings and the purposes of foreign commerce,

the incentives to private hoarding exist no longer, and the

hoards have all been transferred to the banks, or rather, I

should say, to the Bank of England. But in France, where the

bank-note circulation is still comparatively limited, the

quantity of gold l and silver coin in existence I find now

currently estimated, on what are described as the latest

authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions sterling; nor is

the estimate at all at variance with the reasonable probabilities

of the case. Of this vast treasure there is every reason to

presume that a very large proportion, probably by much the

greater part, is absorbed in the hoards. If you present for

payment a bill for a thousand francs to a french banker, he

brings you the silver in a sealed bag from his strong room. And

not the banker only, but every merchant and trader, according to

his means, is under the necessity of keeping by him a stock of

cash sufficient not only for his ordinary disbursements, but to

meet any unexpected demands. That the quantity of specie

accumulated in these innumerable depots, not in France only, but

all over the Continent, where banking institutions are still

either entirely wanting or very imperfectly organized, is not

merely immense in itself, but admits of being largely drawn upon,

and transferred even in vast masses from one country to another,

with very little, if any, effect on prices, or other material

derangements, we have had some remarkable proofs: "among others,

"the signal success which attended the simultaneous efforts of

some of the principal European powers (Russia, Austria, Prussia,

Sweden, and Denmark) to replenish their treasuries, and to

replace with coin a considerable portion of the depreciated paper

which the necessities of the war had forced upon them, and this

at the very time when the available stock of the precious metals

over the world had been reduced by the exertions of England to

recover her metallic currency..... There can be no doubt that

these combined operations were on a scale of very extraordinary

magnitude, that they were accomplished without any sensible

injury to commerce or public prosperity, or any other effect than

some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and that the private

hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe during the war

must have been the principal source from which all this gold and

silver was collected. And no person, I think, can fairly

contemplate the vast superflux of metallic wealth thus proved to

be at all times in existence, and, though in a dormant and inert

state, always ready to spring into activity on the first

indication of a sufficiently intense demand, without feeling

themselves compelled to admit the possibility of the mines being

even shut up for years together, and the production of the metals

altogether suspended, while there might be scarcely a perceptible

alteration in the exchangeable value of the metal." (8*)

    Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates,

"one might imagine," says Mr Fullarton,(9*) "that they supposed

the gold which is drained off for exportation from a country

using a currency exclusively metallic, to be collected by

driblets at the fairs and markets, or from the tills of the

grocers and mercers. They never even allude to the existence of

such a thing as a great hoard of the metals, though upon the

action of the hoards depends the whole economy of international

payments between specie-circulating communities, while any

operation of the money collected in hoards upon prices must, even

according to the currency hypothesis, be wholly impossible. We

know from experience what enormous payments in gold and silver

specie-circulating countries are capable, at times, of making,

without the least disturbance of their internal prosperity; and

whence is it supposed that these payments come, but from their

hoards? let us think how the money market of a country

transacting all its exchanges through the medium of the precious

metals only, would be likely to be affected by the necessity of

making a foreign payment of several millions. Of course the

necessity could only be satisfied by a transmission of capital;

and would not the competition for the possession of capital for

transmission which the occasion would call forth, necessarily

raise the market rate of interest? If the payment was to be made

by the government, would not the government, in all probability,

have to open a new loan on terms more than usually favourable to

the lender?" If made by merchants, would it not be drawn either

from the deposits in banks, or from the reserves which merchants

keep by them in default of banks, or would it not oblige them to

obtain the necessary amount of specie by going into the money

market as borrowers? "And would not all this inevitably act upon

the hoards, and draw forth into activity a portion of the gold

and silver which the money-dealers had been accumulating, and

some of them with the express view of watching such opportunities

for turning their treasures to advantage?.... 

    "To come to the present time, the balance of payments with

nearly all Europe has for about four years past been in favour of

this country, and gold has been pouring in till the influx

amounts to the unheard-of sum of about fourteen millions

sterling. Yet in all this time, has any one heard a complaint of

any serious suffering inflicted on the people of the Continent?

Have prices there been greatly depressed beyond their range in

this country? Have wages fallen, Or have merchants been

extensively ruined by the universal depreciation of their stock?

There has occurred nothing of the kind. The tenor of commercial

and monetary affairs has been everywhere even and tranquil; and

in France more particularly, an improving revenue and extended

commerce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal

prosperity. It may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux of

gold has withdrawn from that portion of the metallic wealth of

the nation which really circulates, a single napoleon. And it has

been equally obvious, from the undisturbed state of credit, that

not only has the supply of specie indispensable for the conduct

of business in the retail market been all the while

uninterrupted, but that the hoards have continued to furnish

every facility requisite for the regularity of mercantile

payments. It is of the very essence of the metallic system, that

the hoards, in all cases of probable occurrence, should be equal

to both objects; that they should, in the first place, supply the

bullion demanded for exportation, and in the next place, should

keep up the home circulation to its legitimate complement. Every

man trading under that system, who, in the corse of his business,

may have frequent occasion to remit large sums in specie to

foreign countries, must either keep by him a sufficient treasure

of his own or must have the means of borrowing enough from his

neighbours, not only to make up when wanted the amount of his

remittances, but to enable him, moreover, to carry on his

ordinary transactions at home without interruption."

    In a country in which credit is carried to so great an extent

as in England, one great reserve, in a single establishment, the

Bank of England, supplies the place, as far as the precious

metals are concerned, of the multitudinous reserves of other

countries. The theoretical principle, therefore, of the currency

doctrine would require, that all those drains of the metal,

which, if the currency were purely metallic, would be taken from

the hoards, should be allowed to operate freely upon the reserve

in the coffers of the Bank of England, without any attempt to

stop it either by a diminution of the currency or by a

contraction of credit. Nor to this would there be any

well-grounded objection, unless the drain were so great as to

threaten the exhaustion of the reserve, and a consequent stoppage

of payments; a danger against which it is possible to take

adequate precautions, because in the cases which we are

considering, the drain is for foreign payments of definite

amount, and stops of itself as soon as these are effected. And in

all systems it is admitted that the habitual reserve of the Bank

should exceed the utmost amount to which experience warrants the

belief that such a drain may extend; which extreme limit Mr

Fullarton affirms to be seven millions, but Mr Tooke recommends

an average reserve of ten, and in his last publication, of twelve

millions. Under these circumstances, the habitual reserve, which

would never be employed in discounts, but kept to be paid out

exclusively in exchange for cheques or bank notes, would be

sufficient for a crisis of this description; which therefore

would pass off without having its difficulties increased by a

contraction either of credit or of the circulation. But this, the

most advantageous denouement that the case admits of, and not

only consistent with but required by the professed principle of

the system, the panegyrists of the system claim for it as a great

merit that it prevents. They boast, that on the first appearance

of a drain for exportation-whatever may be its cause, and

whether, under a metallic currency, it would involve a

contraction of credit or not -- the Bank is at once obliged to

curtail its advances. And this, be it remembered, when there has

been no speculative rise of prices which it is indispensable to

correct, no unusual extension of credit requiring contraction;

but the demand for gold is solely occasioned by foreign payments

on account of government, or large corn importations consequent

on a bad harvest. 

    Even supposing that the reserve is insufficient to meet the

foreign payments, and that the means wherewith to make them have

to be taken from the loanable capital of the country, the

consequence of which is a rise of the rate of interest; in such

circumstances some pressure on the money market is unavoidable,

but that pressure is much increased in severity by the separation

of the banking from the issue department. The case is generally


stated as if the Act only operated in one way, namely, by

preventing the Bank, when it has parted with (say) three millions

of bullion in exchange for three millions of its notes, from

again lending those notes, in discounts or other advances. But

the Act really does much more than this. It is well known, that

the first operation of a drain is always on the banking

department. The bank deposits constitute the bulk of the

unemployed and disposable capital of the country; and capital

wanted for foreign payments is almost always obtained mainly by

drawing out deposits. Supposing three millions to be the amount

wanted, three millions of notes are drawn from the banking

department (either directly or through the private bankers, who

keep the bulk of their reserves with the Bank of England), and

the three millions of notes, thus obtained, are presented at the

Issue Department, and exchanged against gold for exportation.

Thus a drain upon the country at large of only three millions, is

a drain upon the Bank virtually of six millions. The deposits

have lost three millions, and the reserve of the Issue Department

has lost an equal amount. As the two departments, so long as the

Act remains in operation, cannot even in the utmost extremity

help one another, each must take its separate precautions for its

own safety. Whatever measures, therefore, on the part of the

Bank, would have been required under the old system by a drain of

six millions, are now rendered necessary by a drain only of

three. The Issue Department protects itself in the manner

prescribed by the Act, by not re-issuing the three millions of

notes which have been returned to it. But the Banking Department

must take measures to replenish its reserve, which has been

reduced by three millions. Its liabilities having also decreased

three millions, by the loss of that amount of deposits, the

reserve, on the ordinary banking principle of a third of the

liabilities, will bear a reduction of one million. But the other

two millions it must procure by letting that amount of advances

out, and not renewing them. Not only must it raise its rate of

interest, but it must effect, by whatever means, a diminution of

two millions in the total amount of its discounts: or it must

sell securities to an equal amount. This violent action on the

money market for the purpose of replenishing the Banking reserve,

is wholly occasioned by the Act of 1844. If the restrictions of

that Act did not exist, the Bank, instead of contracting its

discounts, would simply transfer two millions, either in gold or

in notes, from the Issue to the Banking Department; not in order

to lend them to the public, but to secure the solvency of the

Banking Department in the event of further unexpected demands by

the depositors. And unless the drain continued, and reached so

great an amount as to seem likely to exceed the whole of the gold

in the reserves of both departments, the Bank would be under no

necessity, while the pressure lasted, of withholding from

commerce its accustomed amount of accommodation, at a rate of

interest corresponding to the increased demand.(10*)

    I am aware it will be said that by allowing drains of this

character to operate freely upon the Bank reserve until they

cease of themselves, a contraction of the currency and of credit

would not be prevented, but only postponed; since if a limitation

of issues were not resorted to for the purpose of checking the

drain in its commencement, the same or a still greater limitation

must take place afterwards, in order, by acting on prices, to

bring back this large quantity of gold, for the indispensable

purpose of replenishing the Bank reserve. But in this argument

several things are overlooked. In the first place, the gold might

be brought back, not by a fall of prices, but by the much more

rapid and convenient medium of a rise of the rate of interest,

involving no fall of any prices except the price of securities.

Either English securities would be bought on account of

foreigners, or foreign securities held in England would be sent

abroad for sale, both which operations took place largely during

the mercantile difficulties of 1847, and not only checked the

efflux of gold, but turned the tide and brought the metal back.

It was not, therefore, brought back by a contraction of the

currency, though in this case it certainly was so by a

contraction of loans. But even this is not always indispensable

for in the second place, it is not necessary that the gold should

return with the same suddenness with which it went out. A great

portion would probably return in the ordinary way of commerce, in

payment for exported commodities. The extra gains made by dealers

and producers in foreign countries through the extra payments

they receive from this country, are very likely to be partly

expended in increased purchases of English commodities, either

for consumption or on speculation, though the effect may not

manifest itself with sufficient rapidity to enable the

transmission of gold to be dispensed with in the first instance.

These extra purchases would turn the balance of payments in

favour of the country, and gradually restore a portion of the

exported gold; and the remainder would probably be brought back,

without any considerable rise of the rate of interest in England,

by the fall of it in foreign countries, occasioned by the

addition of some millions of gold to the loanable capital of

those countries. Indeed, in the state of things consequent on the

gold discoveries, when the enormous quantity of gold annually

produced in Australia, and much of that from California, is

distributed to other countries through England, and a month

seldom passes without a large arrival, the Bank reserves can

replenish themselves without any re-importation of the gold

previously carried off by a drain. All that is needful is an

intermission, and a very brief intermission is sufficient, of the

exportation. 

    For these reasons it appears to me, that notwithstanding the

beneficial operation of the Act of 1844 in the first stages of

one kind of commercial crisis (that produced by

over-speculation), it on the whole materially aggravates the

severity of commercial revulsions. And not only are contractions

of credit made more severe by the Act, they are also made greatly

more frequent. "Suppose," says Mr George Walker, in a clear,

impartial, and conclusive series of papers in the Aberdeen

Herald, forming one of the best existing discussions of the

present question-"suppose that, of eighteen millions of gold, ten

are in the issue department and eight are in the banking

department. The result is the same as under a metric currency

with only eight millions in reserve, instead of eighteen......

The effect of the Bank Act is, that the proceedings of the Bank

under a drain are not determined by the amount of gold within its

vaults, but are, or ought to be, determined by the portion of it

belonging to the banking department. With the whole of the gold

at its disposal, it may find it unnecessary to interfere with

credit, or force down prices, if a drain leave a fair reserve

behind. With only the banking reserve at its disposal, it must,

from the narrow margin it has to operate on, meet all drains by

counteractives more or less strong, to the injury of the

commercial world; and if it fail to do so, as it may fail, the

consequence is destruction. Hence the extraordinary and frequent

variations of the rate of interest under the Bank Act. Since

1847; when the eyes of the Bank were opened to its true position,

it has felt it necessary, as a precautionary measure, that every

variation in the reserve should be accompanied by an iteration in

the rate of interest." To make the Act innocuous, therefore, it

would be necessary that the Bank, in addition to the whole of the

gold in the Issue Department, should retain as great a reserve in

gold or notes in the Banking Department alone, as would suffice

under the old system for the security both of the issues and of

the deposits. 



    5. There remain two questions respecting a bank-note

currency, which have also been a subject of considerable

discussion of late years: whether the privilege of providing it

should be confined to a single establishment, such as the Bank of

England, or a plurality of issuers should be allowed; and in the

latter case, whether any peculiar precautions are requisite or

advisable, to protect the holders of notes against losses

occasioned by the insolvency of the issuers. 

    The course of the preceding speculations has led us to attach

so much less of peculiar importance to bank notes, as compared

with other forms of credit, than accords with the notions

generally current, that questions respecting the regulation of so

very small a part of the general mass of credit, cannot appear to

us of such momentous import as they are sometimes considered.

Bank notes, however, have so far a real peculiarity, that they

are the only form of credit sufficiently convenient for all the

purposes of circulation, to be able entirely to supersede the use

of metallic money for internal purposes. Though the extension of

the use of cheques has a tendency more and more to diminish the

number of bank notes, as it would that of the sovereigns or other

coins which would take their place if they were abolished; there

is sure, for a long time to come, to be a considerable supply of

them, wherever the necessary degree of commercial confidence

exists, and their free use is permitted. The exclusive privilege,

therefore, of issuing them, if reserved to the Government or to

some one body, is a source of great pecuniary gain. That this

gain should be obtained for the nation at large is both

practicable and desirable: and if the management of a bank-note

currency ought to be so completely mechanical, so entirely a

thing of fixed rule, as it is made by the Act of 1844, there

seems no reason why this mechanism should be worked for the

profit of any private issuer, rather than for the public

treasury. If, however, a plan be preferred which leaves the

variations in the amount of issues in any degree whatever to the

discretion of the issuers, it is not desirable that to the

ever-growing attributions of the Government, so delicate a

function should be superadded; and that the attention of the

heads of the state should be diverted from larger objects, by

their being besieged with the applications, and made a mark for

all the attacks, which are never spared to those deemed to be

responsible for any acts, however minute, connected with the

regulation of the currency. It would be better that treasury

notes, exchangeable for gold on demand, should be issued to a

fixed amount, not exceeding the minimum of a bank-note currency;

the remainder of the notes which may be required being left to be

supplied either by one or by a number of private banking

establishments. Or an establishment like the Bank of England

might supply the whole country, on condition of lending fifteen

or twenty millions of its notes to the government without

interest; which would give the same pecuniary advantage to the

state as if it issued that number of its own notes. 

    The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the system

of plurality of issuers which existed in England before the Act

of 1844, and under certain limitations still subsists, is that

the competition of these different issuers induces them to

increase the amount of their notes to an injurious extent. But we

have seen that the power which bankers have of augmenting their

issues, and the degree of mischief which they can produce by it,

are quite trifling compared with the current over-estimate. As

remarked by Mr Fullarton, (11*) the extraordinary increase of

banking competition occasioned by the establishment of the

joint-stock banks, a competition often of the most reckless kind,

has proved utterly powerless to enlarge the aggregate mass of the

bank-note circulation; that aggregate circulation having, on the

contrary, actually decreased. In the absence of any special case

for an exception to freedom of industry, the general rule ought

to prevail. It appears desirable, however, to maintain one great

establishment like the Bank of England, distinguished from other

banks of issue in this, that it alone is required to pay in gold,

the others being at liberty to pay their notes with notes of the

central establishment. The object of this is that there may be

one body, responsible for maintaining a reserve of the precious

metals sufficient to meet any drain that can reasonably be

expected to take place. By disseminating this responsibility

among a number of banks, it is prevented from operating

efficaciously upon any. or if it be still enforced against one,

the reserves of the metals retained by all the others are capital

kept idle in pure waste, which may be dispensed with by allowing

them at their option to pay in Bank of England notes. 



    6. The question remains whether, in case of a plurality of

issuers, any peculiar precautions are needed to protect the

holders of notes from the consequences of failure of payment.

Before 1826, the insolvency of banks of issue was a frequent and

very serious evil, often spreading distress through a whole

neighbourhood, and at one blow depriving provident industry of

the results of long and painful saving. This was one of the chief

reasons which induced Parliament, in that year, to prohibit the

issue of bank notes of a denomination below five pounds, that the

labouring classes at least might be as little as possible exposed

to participate in this suffering. As an additional safeguard, it

has been suggested to give the holders of notes a priority over

other creditors, or to require bankers to deposit stock or other

public securities as a pledge for the whole amount of their

issues. The insecurity of the former bank-note currency of

England was partly the work of the law, which, in order to give a

qualified monopoly of banking business to the Bank of England,

had actually made the formation of safe banking establishments a

punishable offence, by prohibiting the existence of any banks, in

town or country, whether of issue or deposit, with a number of

partners exceeding six. This truly characteristic specimen of the

old system of monopoly and restriction vas done away with in

1826, both as to issues and deposits, everywhere but in a

district of sixty-five miles radius round London, and in 1833 in

that district also, as far as relates to deposits. It was hoped

that the numerous joint-stock banks since established would have

furnished a more trustworthy currency, and that under their

influence the banking system of England would have been almost as

secure to the public as that of Scotland (where banking was

always free) has been for two centuries past. But the almost

incredible instances of reckless and fraudulent mismanagement

which these institutions have of late afforded (though in some of

the most notorious cases the delinquent establishments have not

been banks of issue), have shown only too clearly that, south of

the Tweed at least, the joint-stock principle applied to banking

is not the adequate safeguard it was so confidently supposed to

be: and it is difficult now to resist the conviction, that if

plurality of issuers is allowed to exist, some kind of special

security in favour of the holders of notes should be exacted as

an imperative condition. 



NOTES:



1. Regulation of Currencies, p. 85.



2. I think myself justified in affirming that the mitigation of

commercial revulsions is the real, and only serious, purpose of

the Act of 1844. I am quite aware that its supporters insist

(especially since 1847) on its supreme efficacy in "maintaining

the convertibility of the Bank note." But I must be excused for

not attaching any serious importance to this one among its

alleged merits. The convertibility of the Bank note was

maintained, and would have continued to be maintained, at

whatever cost, under the old system. As was well said by Lord

Overstone in his Evidence, the Bank can always, by a sufficiently

violent action on credit, save itself at the expense of the

mercantile public. That the Act of 1844 mitigates the violence of

that process, is a sufficient claim to prefer in its behalf.

Besides, if we suppose such a degree of mismanagement, on the

part of the Bank, as, were it not for the Act, would endanger the

continuance of convertibility, the same (or a less) degree of

mismanagement, practised under the Act, would suffice to produce

a suspension of payments by the Banking Department; an event

which the compulsory separation of the two departments brings

much nearer to possibility than it was before, and which,

involving as it would the probable stoppage of every private

banking establishment in London, and perhaps also the non-payment

of the dividends to the national creditor, would be a far greater

immediate calamity than a brief interruption of the

convertibility of the note; insomuch that, to enable the Bank to

resume payment of its deposits, no Government would hesitate a

moment to suspend payment of the notes, if suspension of the Act

of 1844 proved insufficient. 

3. A conditional increase of this maximum is permitted, but only

when by arrangement with any country bank the issues of that bank

are discontinued, and Bank of England motes substituted; and even

then the increase is limited to two-thirds of the amount of the

country notes to be thereby superseded. Under the provision the

amount of notes which the Bank of England is now at liberty to

issue against securities, is about fifteen millions.



4. p. 106.



5. True the Bank is not precluded from making increased advances

from its deposits, which are likely to be of unusually large

amount, since, at these periods, every one leaves his money in

deposit in order to have it within call. But, that the deposits

are not always sufficient, was conclusively proved in 1847, when

the Bank stretched to the very utmost the means of relieving

commerce which its deposits afforded, without allaying the panic,

which however ceased at once when the Government decided on

suspending the Act.



6. This prediction was verified on the very next occurrence of a

commercial crisis, in 1857; when Government were again under the

necessity of suspending, on their own responsibility, the

provisions of the Act.



7. It is known, from unquestionable facts, that the hoards of

money at all times existing in the hands of the French peasantry,

often from a remote date, surpass any amount which could have

been imagined possible; and even in so poor a country as Ireland,

it has of late been ascertained, that the small farmers sometimes

possess hoards quite disproportioned to their visible means of

subsistence.



8. Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, pp. 71-4.



9. Ib. pp. 139-42.



10. This, which I have called "the double action of drains." has

been strangely understood as if I had asserted that the Bank is

compelled to part with six millions' worth of property by a drain

of three millions. such an assertion would be too absurd to

require any refutation. Drains have a double action, not upon the

pecuniary position of the Bank itself, but upon the measures it

is forced to take in order to stop the drain. Though the Bank

itself is no poorer, its two reserves, the reserve in the banking

department and the reserve in the issue department, have each

been reduced by three millions by a drain of only three. And as

the separation of the departments renders it necessary that each

of them separately should be kept as strong as the two together

need be if they could help one another, the Bank's action on the

money market must be as violent on a drain of three millions, as

would have been required on the old system for one of six. The

reserve in the banking department being less than it otherwise

would be by the entire amount of the bullion in the issue

department, and the whole amount of the drain falling in the

first instance on that diminished reserve, the pressure of the

whole drain on the half reserve is as much felt, and requires as

strong measures to stop it, as a pressure of twice the amount on

the entire reserve. As I have said elsewhere "it is as if a man

having to lift a weight were restricted from using both hands to

do it, and where only allowed to use one hand at a time: in which

case it would be necessary that each of his hands should be as

strong as the two together." {Evidence before the Committee of

the House of Commons on the Bank Acts, in 1857.



11. Pp. 89-92.


