The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 12

Influence of Credit on Money


    1. Having now formed a general idea of the modes in which
credit is made available as a substitute for money, we have to
consider in what manner the use of these substitutes affects the
value of money, or, what is equivalent, the prices of
commodities. It is hardly necessary to say that the permanent
value of money -- the natural and average prices of commodities
-- are not in question here. These are determined by the cost of
producing or of obtaining the precious metals. An ounce of gold
or silver will in the long run exchange for as much of every
other commodity, as can be produced or imported at the same cost
with itself. And an order, or note of hand, or bill payable at
sight, for an ounce of gold, while the credit of the giver is
unimpaired, is worth neither more nor less than the gold itself. 
    It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with
immediate and temporary prices, that we are now concerned. These,
as we have seen, may deviate very widely from the standard of
cost of production. Among other causes of fluctuation, one we
have found to be, the quantity of money in circulation. Other
things being the same, an increase of the money in circulation
raises prices, a diminution lowers them. If more money is thrown
into circulation than the quantity which can circulate at a value
conformable to its cost of production, the value of money, so
long as the excess lasts, will remain below the standard of cost
of production, and general prices will be sustained above the
natural rate. 
    But we have now found that there are other things, such as
bank notes, bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate as
money, and perform all the functions of it: and the question
arises, Do these various substitutes operate on prices in the
same manner as money itself? Does an increase in the quantity of
transferable paper tend to raise prices, in the same manner and
degree as an increase in the quantity of money? There has been no
small mount of discussion on this point among writers on
currency, without any result so conclusive as to have yet
obtained general assent. 
    I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such, do
not act on prices at all. What does act on prices is Credit, in
whatever shape given, and whether it gives rise to any
transferable instruments capable of passing into circulation, or
not. 
    I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.

    2. Money acts upon prices in no other way than by being
tendered in exchange for commodities. The demand which influences
the prices of commodities consists of the money offered for them.
But the money offered, is not the same thing with the money
possessed. It is sometimes less, sometimes very much more. In the
long run indeed, the money which people lay out will be neither
more nor less than the money which they have to lay out: but this
is far from being the case at any given time. Sometimes they keep
money by them for fear of an emergency, or in expectation of a
more advantageous opportunity for expending it. In that case the
money is said not to be in circulation: in plainer language, it
is not offered, nor about to he offered, for commodities. Money
not in circulation has no effect on prices. The converse,
however, is a much commoner case; people make purchases with
money not in their possession. An article, for instance, which is
paid for by a cheque on a banker, is bought with money which not
only is not in the payer's possession, but generally not even in
the banker's, having been lent by him (all but the usual reserve)
to other persons. We just now made the imaginary supposition that
all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the same bank,
payments being universally made by cheques. In this ideal case,
there would be no money anywhere except in the hands of the
banker: who might then safely part with all of it, by selling it
as bullion, or lending it, to be sent out of the country in
exchange for goods or foreign securities. But though there would
then be no money in possession, or ultimately perhaps even in
existence, money would be offered, and commodities bought with
it, just as at present. People would continue to reckon their
incomes and their capitals in money, and to make their usual
purchases with orders for the receipt of a thing which would have
literally ceased to exist. There would be in all this nothing to
complain of, so long as the money, in disappearing, left an
equivalent value in other things, applicable when required to the
reimbursement of those to whom the money originally belonged. 
    In the case however of payment by cheques, the purchases are
at any rate made, though not with money in the buyer's
possession, yet with money to which he has a right. But he may
make purchases with money which he only expects to have, or even
only pretends to expect. He may obtain goods in return for his
acceptances payable at a future time; or on his note of hand; or
on a simple book credit, that is, on a mere promise to pay. All
these purchases have exactly the same effect on price, as if they
were made with ready money. The amount of purchasing power which
a person can exercise is composed of all the money in his
possession or due to him, and of all his credit. For exercising
the whole of this power he finds a sufficient motive only under
peculiar circumstances; but he always possesses it; and the
portion of it which he at any time does exercise, is the measure
of the effect which he produces on price. 
    Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity will
rise in price, he determines, not only to invest in it all his
ready money, but to take up on credit, from the producers or
importers, as much of it as their opinion of his resources will
enable him to obtain. Every one must see that by thus acting he
produces a greater effect on price, than if he limited his
purchases to the money he has actually in hand. He creates a
demand for the article to the full amount of his money and credit
taken together, and raises the price proportionally to both. And
this effect is produced, though none of the written instruments
called substitutes for currency may be called into existence;
though the transaction may give rise to no bill of exchange, nor
to the issue of a single bank note. The buyer, instead of taking
a mere book credit, might have given a bill for the amount; or
might have paid for the goods with bank notes borrowed for that
purpose from a hanker, thus making the purchase not on his own
credit with the seller, but on the banker's credit with the
seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he would
have produced as great an effect on price as by a simple purchase
to the same amount on a book credit, but no greater effect. The
credit itself, not the form and mode in which it is given, is the
operating cause. 

    3. The inclination of the mercantile public to increase their
demand for commodities by making use of all or much of their
credit as a purchasing power, depends on their expectation of
profit. When there is a general impression that the price of some
commodity is likely to rise, from an extra demand, a short crop,
obstructions to importation, or any other cause, there is a
disposition among dealers to increase their stocks, in order to
profit by the expected rise. This disposition tends in itself to
produce the effect which it looks forward to, a rise of price:
and if the rise is considerable and progressive, other
speculators are attracted, who, so long as the price has not
begun to fall, are willing to believe that it will continue
rising. These, by further purchases, produce a further advance:
and thus a rise of price for which there were originally some
rational grounds, is often heightened by merely speculative
purchases, until it greatly exceeds what the original grounds
will justify. After a time this begins to be perceived; the price
ceases to rise, and the holders, thinking it time to realize
their gains, are anxious to sell. Then the price begins to
decline: the holders rush into the market to avoid a still
greater loss, and, few being willing to buy in a falling market,
the price falls much more suddenly than it rose. Those who have
bought at a higher price than reasonable calculation justified,
and who have been overtaken by the revulsion before they had
realized, are losers in proportion to the greatness of the fall,
and to the quantity of the commodity which they hold, or have
bound themselves to pay for. 
    Now all these effects might take place in a community to
which credit was unknown: the prices of some commodities might
rise from speculation, to an extravagant height, and then fall
rapidly back. But if there were no such thing as credit, this
could hardly happen with respect to commodities generally. If all
purchases were made with ready money, the payment of increased
prices for some articles would draw an unusual proportion of the
money of the community into the markets for those articles, and
must therefore draw it away from some other class of commodities,
and thus lower their prices. The vacuum might, it is true, be
partly filled up by increased rapidity of circulation; and in
this manner the money of the community is virtually increased in
a time of speculative activity, because people keep little of it
by them, but hasten to lay it out in some tempting adventure as
soon as possible after they receive it. This resource, however,
is limited: on the whole, people cannot, while the quantity of
money remains. the same, lay out much more of it in some things,
without laying out less in others. But what they cannot do by
ready money, they can do by an extension of credit. When people
go into the market and purchase with money which they hope to
receive hereafter, they are drawing upon an unlimited, not a
limited fund. Speculation, thus supported, may be going on in any
number of commodities, without disturbing the regular course of
business in others. It might even be going on in all commodities
at once. We could imagine that in an epidemic fit of the passion
of gambling, all dealers, instead of giving only their accustomed
orders to the manufacturers or growers of their commodity,
commenced buying up all of it which they could procure, as far as
their capital and credit would go. All prices would rise
enormously, even if there were no increase of money, and no paper
credit, but a mere extension of purchases on book credits. After
a time those who had bought would wish to sell, and prices would
collapse. 
    This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a commercial
crisis. There is said to be a commercial crisis, when a great
number of merchants and traders at once, either have, or
apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty in meeting their
engagements. The most usual cause of this general embarrassment,
is the recoil of prices after they have been raised by a spirit
of speculation, intense in degree, and extending to many
commodities. Some accident which excites expectations of rising
prices, such as the opening of a new foreign market, or
simultaneous indications of a short supply of several great
articles of commerce, sets speculation at work in several leading
departments at once. The prices rise, and the holders realize, or
appear to have the power of realizing, great gains. In certain
states of the public mind, such examples of rapid increase of
fortune call forth numerous imitators, and speculation not only
goes much beyond what is justified by the original grounds for
expecting rise of price, but extends itself to articles in which
there never was any such ground: these, however, rise like the
rest as soon as speculation sets in. At periods of this kind, a
great extension of credit takes place. Not only do all whom the
contagion reaches, employ their credit much more freely than
usual; but they really have more credit, because they seem to be
making unusual gains, and because a generally reckless and
adventurous feeling prevails, which disposes people to give as
well as take credit more largely than at other times, and give it
to persons not entitled to it. In this manner, in the celebrated
speculative year 1825, and at various other periods during the
present century, the prices of many of the principal articles of
commerce rose greatly, without any fall in others, so that
general prices might, without incorrectness, be said to have
risen. When, after such a rise, the reaction comes, and prices
begin to fall, though at first perhaps only through the desire of
the holders to realize, speculative purchases cease: but were
this all, prices would only fall to the level from which they
rose, or to that which is justified by the state of the
consumption and of the supply. They fall, however, much lower;
for as, when prices were rising, and everybody apparently making
a fortune, it was easy to obtain almost any amount of credit, so
now, when everybody seems to be losing, and many fail entirely,
it is with difficulty that firms of known solidity can obtain
even the credit to which they are accustomed, and which it is the
greatest inconvenience to them to be without; because all dealers
have engagements to fulfil, and nobody feeling sure that the
portion of his means which he has entrusted to others will be
available in time, no one likes to part with ready money, or to
postpone his claim to it. To these rational considerations there
is superadded, in extreme cases, a panic as unreasoning as the
previous overconfidence; money is borrowed for short periods at
almost any rate of interest, and sales of goods for immediate
payment are made at almost any sacrifice. Thus general prices,
during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below the usual
level, as during the previous period of speculation they have
risen above it: the fall, as well as the rise, originating not in
anything affecting money, but in the state of credit; an
unusually extended employment of credit during the earlier
period, followed by a great diminution, never amounting however
to an entire cessation of it, in the later.
    It is not, however, universally true that the contraction of
credit, characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have been
preceded by an extraordinary and irrational extension of it.
There are other causes; and one of the more recent crises, that
of 1847, is an instance, having been preceded by no particular
extension of credit, and by no speculations; except those in
railway shares, which, though in many cases extravagant enough,
yet being carried on mostly with that portion of means which the
speculators could afford to lose, were not calculated to produce
the widespread ruin which arises from vicissitudes of price in
the commodities in which men habitually deal, and in which the
bulk of their capital is invested. The crisis of 1847 belonged to
another class of mercantile phenomena. There occasionally happens
a concurrence of circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan
market a considerable portion of the capital which usually
supplies it. These circumstances, in the present case, were great
foreign payments, (occasioned by a high price of cotton and an
unprecedented importation of food,) together with the continual
demands on the circulating capital of the country by railway
calls and the loan transactions of railway companies, for the
purpose of being converted into fixed capital and made
unavailable for future lending. These various demands fell
principally, as such demands always do, on the loan market. A
great, though not the greatest part of the imported food, was
actually paid for by the proceeds of a government loan. The extra
payments which purchasers of corn and cotton, and railway
shareholders, found themselves obliged to make, were either made
with their own spare cash, or with money raised for the occasion.
On the first supposition, they were made by withdrawing deposits
from bankers, and thus cutting off a part of the streams which
fed the loan market; on the second supposition, they were made by
actual drafts on the loan market, either by the sale of
securities, or by taking up money at interest. This combination
of a fresh demand for loans, with a curtailment of the capital
disposable for them, raised the rate of interest, and made it
impossible to borrow except on the very best security. Some
firms, therefore, which by an improvident and unmercantile mode
of conducting business had allowed their capital to become either
temporarily or permanently unavailable, became unable to command
that perpetual renewal of credit which had previously enabled
them to struggle on. These firms stopped payment: their failure
involved more or less deeply many other firms which had trusted
them; and, as usual in such cases, the general distrust, commonly
called a panic, began to set in, and might have produced a
destruction of credit equal to that of 1825, had not
circumstances which may almost be called accidental, given to a
very simple measure of the government (the suspension of the Bank
Charter Act of 1844) a fortunate power of allaying panic, to
which, when considered in itself, it had no sort of claim.(1*) 

    4. The general operation of credit upon prices being such as
we have described, it is evident that if any particular mode or
form of credit is calculated to have a greater operation on
prices than others, it can only be by giving greater facility, or
greater encouragement, to the multiplication of credit
transactions generally. If bank notes, for instance, or bills,
have a greater effect on prices than book credits, it is not by
any difference in the transactions themselves, which are
essentially the same, whether taking place in the one way or in
the other: it must be that there are likely to be more of them.
If credit is likely to be more extensively used as a purchasing
power when bank notes or bills are the instruments used, than
when the credit is given by mere entries in an account, to that
extent and no more there is ground for ascribing to the former a
greater power over the markets than belongs to the latter. 
    Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As far as
respects the particular transactions, it makes no difference in
the effect on price whether A buys goods of B on simple credit,
or gives a bill for them, or pays for them with bank notes lent
to him by a banker C. The difference is in a subsequent stage. If
A has bought the goods on a book credit, there is no obvious or
convenient mode by which B can make A's debt to him a means of
extending his own credit. Whatever credit he has, will be due to
the general opinion entertained of his solvency; he cannot
specifically pledge A's debt to a third person, as a security for
money lent or goods bought. But if A has given him a bill for the
amount, he can get this discounted, which is the same thing as
borrowing money on the joint credit of A and himself: or he may
pay away the bill in exchange for goods, which is obtaining goods
on the same joint credit. In either case, here is a second credit
transaction, grounded on the first, and which would not have
taken place if the first had been transacted without the
intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions end here. The
bill may be again discounted, or again paid away for goods,
several times before it is itself presented for payment. Nor
would it be correct to say that these successive holders, if they
had not had the bill, might have attained their purpose by
purchasing goods on their own credit with the dealers. They may
not all of them be persons of credit, or they may already have
stretched their credit as far as it will go. And at all events,
either money or goods are more readily obtained on the credit of
two persons than of one. Nobody will pretend that it is as easy a
thing for a merchant to borrow a thousand pounds on his own
credit, as to get a bill discounted to the same amount, when the
drawee is of known solvency. 
    If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains a
loan of bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays B for his
goods, we shall find the difference to be still greater. B is now
independent even of a discounter: A's bill would have been taken
in payment only by those who were acquainted with his reputation
for solvency, but a banker is a person who has credit with the
public generally, and whose notes are taken in payment by every
one, at least in his own neighbourhood: insomuch that, by a
custom which has grown into law, payment in bank notes is a
complete acquittance to the payer, whereas if he has paid by a
bill, he still remains liable to the debt, if the person on whom
the bill is drawn fails to pay it when due. B therefore can
expend the whole of the bank notes without at all involving his
own credit; and whatever power he had before of obtaining goods
on book credit, remains to him unimpaired, in addition to the
purchasing power he derives from the possession of the notes. The
same remark applies to every person in succession, into whose
hands the notes may come. It is only A, the first holder, (who
used his credit to obtain the notes as a loan from the issuer,)
who can possibly find the credit he possesses in other quarters
abated by it; and even in his case that result is not probable;
for though, in reason, and if all his circumstances were known,
every draft already made upon his credit ought to diminish by so
much his power of obtaining more, yet in practice the reverse
more frequently happens, and his having been trusted by one
person is supposed to be evidence that he may safely be trusted
by others also. 
    It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful
instrument for raising prices than bills, and bills than book
credits. It does not, indeed, follow that credit will be more
used because it can be. When the state of trade holds out no
particular temptation to make large purchases on credit, dealers
will use only a small portion of the credit power, and it will
depend only on convenience whether the portion which they use
will be taken in one form or in another. It is not until the
circumstances of the markets, and the state of the mercantile
mind, render many persons desirous of stretching their credit to
an unusual extent, that the distinctive properties of the
different forms of credit display themselves. Credit already
stretched to the utmost in the form of book debts, would be
susceptible of a great additional extension by means of bills,
and of a still greater by means of bank notes. The first, because
each dealer, in addition to his own credit, would be enabled to
create a further purchasing power out of the credit which he had
himself given to others: the second, because the banker's credit
with the public at large, coined into notes, as bullion is coined
into pieces of money to make it portable and divisible, is so
much purchasing power superadded, in the hands of every
successive holder, to that which he may derive from his own
credit. To state the matter otherwise; one single exertion of the
credit-power in the form of book credit, is only the foundation
of a single purchase: but if a bill is drawn, that same portion
of credit may serve for as many purchases as the number of times
the bill changes hands: while every bank note issued, renders the
credit of the banker a purchasing power to that amount in the
hands of all the successive holders, without impairing any power
they may possess of effecting purchases on their own credit.
Credit, in short, has exactly the same purchasing power with
money; and as money tells upon prices not simply in proportion to
its amount, but to its amount multiplied by the number of times
it changes hands, so also does credit; and credit transferable
from hand to hand is in that proportion more potent, than credit
which only performs one purchase.

    5. All this purchasing power, however, is operative upon
prices, only according to the proportion of it which is used; and
the effect, therefore, is only felt in a state of circumstances
calculated to lead to an unusually extended use of credit. In
such a state of circumstances, that is, in speculative times, it
cannot, I think, be denied, that prices are likely to rise higher
if the speculative purchases are made with bank notes, than when
they are made with bills, and when made by bills than when made
by book credits. This, however, is of far less practical
importance than might at first be imagined; because, in point of
fact, speculative purchases are not, in the great majority of
cases, made either with bank notes or with bills, but are made
almost exclusively on book credits. "Applications to the Bank for
extended discount," says the highest authority on such
subjects,(2*) (and the same thing must be true of applications to
other banks) "occur rarely if ever in the origin or progress of
extensive speculations in commodities. These are entered into,
for the most part if not entirely, in the first instance, on
credit, for the length of term usual in the several trades; thus
entailing on the parties no immediate necessity for borrowing so
much as may he wanted for the purpose beyond their own available
capital. This applies particularly to speculative purchases of
commodities on the spot, with a view to resale. But these
generally form the smaller proportion of engagements on credit.
By far the largest of those entered into on the prospect of a
rise of prices, are such as have in view importations from
abroad. The same remark, too, is applicable to the export of
commodities, when a large proportion is on the credit of the
shippers or their consignees. As long as circumstances hold out
the prospect of a favourable result, the credit of the parties is
generally sustained. If some of them wish to realize, there are
others with capital and credit ready to replace them; and if the
events fully justify the grounds on which the speculative
transactions were entered into (thus admitting of sales for
consumption in time to replace the capital embarked) there is no
unusual demand for borrowed capital to sustain them. It is only
when by the vicissitudes of political events, or of the seasons,
or other adventitious circumstances, the forthcoming supplies are
found to exceed the computed rate of consumption, and a fall of
prices ensues, that an increased demand for capital takes place;
the market rate of interest then rises, and increased
applications are made to the Bank of England for discount." So
that the multiplication of bank notes and other transferable
paper does not, for the most part, accompany and facilitate the
speculation; but comes into play chiefly when the tide is
turning, and difficulties begin to be felt. 
    Of the extraordinary height to which speculative transactions
can be carried upon mere book credits, without the smallest
addition to what is commonly called the currency, very few
persons are at all aware. "The power of purchase," says Mr
Tooke,(3*) "by persons having capital and credit, is much beyond
anything that those who are unacquainted practically with
speculative markets have any idea of.... A person having the
reputation of capital enough for his regular business, and
enjoying good credit in his trade, if he takes a sanguine view of
the prospect of a rise of price of the article in which he deals,
and is favoured by circumstances in the outset and progress of
his speculation, may effect purchases to an extent perfectly
enormous, compared with his capital." Mr Tooke confirms this
statement by some remarkable instances, exemplifying the immense
purchasing power which may be exercised, and rise of price which
may be produced, by credit not represented by either bank notes
or bills of exchange. 
    "Amongst the earlier speculators for an advance in the price
of tea, in consequence of our dispute with China in 1839, were
several retail grocers and tea-dealers. There was a general
disposition among the trade to get into stock: that is, to lay in
at once a quantity which would meet the probable demand from
their customers for several months to come. Some, however, among
them, more sanguine and adventurous than the rest, availed
themselves of their credit with the importers and wholesale
dealers, for purchasing quantities much beyond the estimated
demand in their own business. As the purchases were made in the
first instance ostensibly, and perhaps really, for the legitimate
purposes and within the limits of their regular business, the
parties were enabled to buy without the condition of any deposit;
whereas speculators, known to be such, are required to pay 2l.
per chest, to cover any probable difference of price which might
arise before the expiration of the prompt, which, for this
article, is three months. Without, therefore, the outlay of a
single farthing of actual capital or currency in any shape, they
made purchases to a considerable extent; and with the profit
realized on the resale of a part of these purchases, they were
enabled to pay the deposit on further quantities when required,
as was the case when the extent of the purchases attracted
attention. In this way, the speculation went on at advancing
prices (100 per cent and upwards) till nearly the expiration of
the prompt, and if at that time circumstances had been such as to
justify the apprehension which at one time prevailed, that all
future supplies would be cut off, the prices might have still
further advanced, and at any rate not have retrograded. In this
case, the speculators might have realized, if not all the profit
they had anticipated, a very handsome sum, upon which they might
have been enabled to extend their business greatly, or to retire
from it altogether, with a reputation for great sagacity in thus
making their fortune. But instead of this favourable result, it
so happened that two or three cargoes of tea which had been
transhipped were admitted, contrary to expectation, to entry on
their arrival here, and it was found that further indirect
shipments were in progress. Thus the supply was increased beyond
the calculation of the speculators: and at the same time, the
consumption had been diminished by the high price. There was,
consequently, a violent reaction on the market; the speculators
were unable to sell without such a sacrifice as disabLed them
from fulfilling their engagements, and several of them
consequently failed. Among these, one was mentioned, whO having a
capital not exceeding 1200l. which was locked up in his business,
had contrived to buy 4000 chests, value above 80,000l., the loss
upon which was about 16,000l. 
    "The other example which I have to give, is that of the
operation on the corn market between 1838 and 1842. There was an
instance of a person who, when he entered on his extensive
speculations, was, as it appeared by the subsequent examination
of his affairs, possessed of a capital not exceeding 5000l., but
being successful in the outset, and favoured by circumstances in
the progress of his operations, he contrived to make purchases to
such an extent, that when he stopped payment his engagements were
found to amount to between 500,000l. and 600,000l. Other
instances might be cited of parties without any capital at all,
who, by dint of mere credit, were enabled, while the aspect of
the market favoured their views, to make purchases to a very
great extent. 
    "And be it observed, that these speculations, involving
enormous purchases on little or no capital, were carried on in
1839 and 1840, when the money market was in its most contracted
state; or when, according to modern phraseology, there was the
greatest scarcity of money."
    But though the great instrument of speculative purchases is
book credits, it cannot be contested that in speculative periods
an increase does take place in the quantity both of bills of
exchange and of bank notes. This increase, indeed, so far as bank
notes are concerned, hardly ever takes place in the earliest
stage of the speculations: advances from bankers (as Mr Tooke
observes) not being applied for in order to purchase, but in
order to hold on without selling when the usual term of credit
has expired, and the high price which was calculated on has not
arrived. But the tea speculators mentioned by Mr Tooke could not
have carried their speculations beyond the three months which are
the usual term of credit in their trade, unless they had been
able to obtain advances from bankers, which, if the expectation
of a rise of price had still continued, they probably could have
done. 
    Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more
potent instrument for raising prices than book credits, an
unrestrained power of resorting to this instrument may contribute
to prolong and heighten the speculative rise of prices, and hence
to aggravate the subsequent recoil. But in what degree? and what
importance ought we to ascribe to this possibility? It may help
us to form some judgment on this point, if we consider the
proportion which the utmost increase of bank notes in a period of
speculation, bears, I do not say to the whole mass of credit in
the country, but to the bills of exchange alone. The average
amount of bills in existence at any one time is supposed greatly
to exceed a hundred millions sterling.(4*) The bank note
circulation of Great Britain and Ireland seldom exceeds forty
millions, and the increase in speculative periods at most two or
three. And even this, as we have seen, hardly ever comes into
play until that advanced period of the speculation at which the
tide shows signs of turning, and the dealers generally are rather
thinking of the means of fulfilling their existing engagements,
than meditating an extension of them: while the quantity of bills
in existence is largely increased from the very commencement of
the speculations. 

    6. It is well known that of late years, an artificial
limitation of the issue of bank notes has been regarded by many
political economists, and by a great portion of the public, as an
expedient of supreme efficacy for preventing, and when it cannot
prevent, for moderating, the fever of speculation; and this
opinion received the recognition and sanction of the legislature
by the Currency Act of 1844. At the point, however, which our
inquiries have reached, though we have conceded to bank notes a
greater power over prices than is possessed by bills or book
credits, we have not found reason to think that this superior
efficacy has much share in producing the rise of prices which
accompanies a period of speculation, nor consequently that any
restraint applied to this one instrument can be efficacious to
the degree which is often supposed, in moderating either that
rise, or the recoil which follows it. We shall be still less
inclined to think so, when we consider that there is a fourth
form of credit transactions, by cheques on bankers, and transfers
in a banker's books, which is exactly parallel in every respect
to bank notes, giving equal facilities to an extension of credit,
and capable of acting on prices quite as powerfully. In the words
of Mr. Fullarton,(5*) "there is not a single object at present
attained through the agency of Bank of England notes, which might
not be as effectually accomplished by each individual keeping an
account with the bank, and transacting all his payments of five
pounds and upwards by cheque." A bank, instead of lending its
notes to a merchant or dealer, might open an account with him,
and credit the account with the sum it had agreed to advance: on
an understanding that he should not draw out that sum in any
other mode than by drawing cheques against it in favour of those
to whom he had occasion to make payments. These cheques might
possibly even pass from hand to hand like bank notes; more
commonly however the receiver would pay them into the hands of
his own banker, and when he wanted the money, would draw a fresh
cheque against it: and hence an objector may urge that as the
original cheque would very soon be presented for payment, when it
must be paid either in notes or in coin, notes or coin to an
equal amount must be provided as the ultimate means of
liquidation. It is not so, however. The person to whom the cheque
is transferred, may perhaps deal with the same banker, and the
cheque may return to the very bank on which it was drawn: this is
very often the case in country districts; if so, no payment will
be called for, but a simple transfer in the banker's books will
settle the transaction. If the cheque is paid into a different
bank, it will not be presented for payment, but liquidated by
set-off against other cheques; and in a state of circumstances
favourable to a general extension of banking credits, a banker
who has granted more credit, and has therefore more cheques drawn
on him, will also have more cheques on other bankers paid to him,
and will only have to provide notes or cash for the payment of
balances; for which purpose the ordinary reserve of prudent
bankers, one-third of their liabilities, will abundantly suffice.
Now, if he had granted the extension of credit by means of an
issue of his own notes, he must equally have retained, in coin or
Bank of England notes, the usual reserve: so that he can, as Mr.
Fullarton says, give every facility of credit by what may be
termed a cheque circulation, which he could give by a note
circulation. 
    This extension of credit by entries in a banker's books, has
all that superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we
ascribed to an extension by means of bank notes. As a bank note
of 20l., paid to any one, gives him 20l. of purchasing-power
based on credit, over and above whatever credit he had of his
own, so does a cheque paid to him do the same: for, although he
may make no purchase with the cheque itself, he deposits it with
his banker, and can draw against it. As this act of drawing a
cheque against another which has been exchanged and cancelled,
can be repeated as often as a purchase with a bank note, it
effects the same increase of purchasing power. The original loan,
or credit, given by the banker to his customer, is potentially
multiplied as a means of purchase, in the hands of the successive
persons to whom portions of the credit are paid away, just as the
purchasing power of a bank note is multiplied by the number of
persons through whose hands it passes before it is returned to
the issuer.
    These considerations abate very much from the importance of
any effect which can be produced in allaying the vicissitudes of
commerce, by so superficial a contrivance as the one so much
relied on of late, the restriction of the issue of bank notes by
an artificial rule. An examination of all the consequences of
that restriction, and an estimate of the reasons for and against
it, must be deferred until we have treated of the foreign
exchanges, and the international movements of bullion. At present
we are only concerned with the general theory of prices, of which
the different influence of different kinds of credit is an
essential part. 

    7. There has been a great amount of discussion and argument
on the question whether several of these forms of credit, and in
particular whether bank notes, ought to be considered as money.
The question is so purely verbal as to be scarcely worth raising,
and one would have some difficulty in comprehending why so much
importance is attached to it, if there were not some authorities
who, still adhering to the doctrine of the infancy of society and
of political economy, that the quantity of money compared with
that of commodities, determines general prices, think it
important to prove that bank notes and no other forms of credit
are money, in order to support the inference that bank notes and
no other forms of credit influence prices. It is obvious,
however, that prices do not depend on money, but on purchases.
Money left with a banker, and not drawn against, or drawn against
for other purposes than buying commodities, has no effect on
prices, any more than credit which is not used. Credit which is
used to purchase commodities, affects prices in the same manner
as money. Money and credit are thus exactly on a par, in their
effect on prices; and whether we choose to class bank notes with
the one or the other, is in this respect entirely immaterial. 
    Since, however, this question of nomenclature has been
raised, it seems desirable that it should be answered. The reason
given for considering bank notes as money, is, that by law and
usage they have the property, in common with metallic money, of
finally closing the transactions in which they are employed;
while no other mode of paying one debt by transferring another,
has that privilege. The first remark which here suggests itself
is, that on this showing, the notes at least of private banks are
not money; for a creditor cannot be forced to accept them in
payment of a debt. They certainly close the transaction if he
does accept them; but so, on the same supposition, would a bale
of cloth, or a pipe of wine; which are not for that reason
regarded as money. It seems to be an essential part of the idea
of money, that it be legal tender. An inconvertible paper which
is legal tender is universally admitted to be money; in the
French language the phrase papier-monnaie actually means
inconvertibility, convertible notes being merely billets a
porteur. It is only in the case of Bank of England notes under
the law of convertibility, that any difficulty arises; those
notes not being a legal tender from the Bank itself, though a
legal tender from all other persons. Bank of England notes
undoubtedly do close transactions, so far as respects the buyer.
When he has once paid in Bank of England notes, he can in no case
be required to pay over again. But I confess I cannot see how the
transaction can be deemed complete as regards the seller, when he
will only be found to have received the price of his commodity
provided the Bank keeps its promise to pay. An instrument which
would be deprived of all value by the insolvency of a
corporation, cannot be money in any sense in which money is
opposed to credit. It either is not money, or it is money and
credit too. It may be most suitably described as coined credit.
The other forms of credit may be distinguished from it as credit
in ingots. 

    8. Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes, as
compared with other modes of credit, a greater distinction in
respect to influence on price, than we have seen reason to allow;
a difference, not in degree, but in kind. They ground this
distinction on the fact, that all bills and cheques, as well as
all book-debts, are from the first intended to be, and actually
are, ultimately liquidated either in coin or in notes. The bank
notes in circulation, jointly with the coin, are therefore,
according to these authorities, the basis on which all the other
expedients of credit rest; and in proportion to the basis will be
the superstructure; insomuch that the quantity of bank notes
determines that of all the other forms of credit. If bank notes
are multiplied, there will, they seem to think, be more bills,
more payments by cheque, and I presume, more book credits; and by
regulating and limiting the issue of bank notes, they think that
all other forms of credit are, by an indirect consequence,
brought under a similar limitation. I believe I have stated the
opinion of these authorities correctly, though I have nowhere
seen the grounds of it set forth with such distinctness as to
make me feel quite certain that I understand them. It may be
true, that according as there are more or fewer bank notes, there
is also in general (though not invariably), more or less of other
descriptions of credit; for the same state of affairs which leads
to an increase of credit in one shape, leads to an increase of it
in other shapes. But I see no reason for believing that the one
is the cause of the other. If indeed we begin by assuming, as I
suspect is tacitly done, that prices are regulated by coin and
bank notes, the proposition maintained will certainly follow;
for, according as prices are higher or lower, the same purchases
will give rise to bills, cheques, and book credits of a larger or
a smaller amount. But the premise in this reasoning is the very
proposition to be proved. Setting this assumption aside, I know
not how the conclusion can be substantiated. The credit given to
any one by those with whom he deals, does not depend on the
quantity of bank notes or coin in circulation at the time, but on
their opinion of his solvency: if any consideration of a more
general character enters into their calculation, it is only in a
time of pressure on the loan market, when they are not certain of
being themselves able to obtain the credit on which they have
been accustomed to rely; and even then, what they look to is the
general state of the loan market, and not (preconceived theory
apart) the amount of bank notes. So far, as to the willingness to
give credit. And the willingness of a dealer to use his credit,
depends on his expectations of gain, that is, on his opinion of
the probable future price of his commodity; an opinion grounded
either on the rise or fall already going on, or on his
prospective judgment respecting the supply and the rate of
consumption. When a dealer extends his purchases beyond his
immediate means of payment, engaging to pay at a specified time,
he does so in the expectation either that the transaction will
have terminated favourably before that time arrives, or that he
shall then be in possession of sufficient funds from the proceeds
of his other transactions. The fulfilment of these expectations
depends upon prices, but not especially upon the amount of bank
notes. He may, doubtless, also ask himself, in case he should be
disappointed in these expectations, to what quarter he can look
for a temporary advance, to enable him, at the worst, to keep his
engagements. But in the first place, this prospective rejection
on the somewhat more or less of difficulty which he may have in
tiding over his embarrassments, seems too slender an inducement
to be much of a restraint in a period supposed to be one of rash
adventure, and upon persons so confident of success as to involve
themselves beyond their certain means of extrication. And
further, I apprehend that their confidence of being helped out in
the event of ill-fortune, will mainly depend on their opinion of
their own individual credit, with, perhaps, some consideration,
not of the quantity of the currency, but of the general state of
the loan market. They are aware that, in case of a commercial
crisis, they shall have difficulty in obtaining advances. But if
they thought it likely that a commercial crisis would occur
before they had realized, they would not speculate. If no great
contraction of general credit occurs, they will feel no doubt of
obtaining any advances which they absolutely require, provided
the state of their own affairs at the time affords in the
estimation of lenders a sufficient prospect that those advances
will be repaid. 


NOTES:

1. The commercial difficulties, not however amounting to a
commercial crisis, of 1864, had essentially the same origin.
heavy payments for cotton imported at high prices, and large
investments in banking and other joint stock projects, combined
with the loan operations of foreign governments, made such large
drafts upon the loan market as to raise the rate of discount on
mercantile bills as high as nine per cent.

2. Tooke's History of Prices, vol. iv, pp. 125-6.

3. Inquiry into the Currency Principle, pp. 79 and 136-8.

4. The most approved estimate is that of Mr Leatham, grounded on
the official returns of bill stamps issued. The following are the
results: --


            Bills created in
             Great Britain      Average amount in Year
            and Ireland,         circulation at one
             founded on         time in  each year
Year         returns of
             Bill Stamps
            issued from the
             Stamp Office

1832        £356,153,409         £89,038,352
1833         383,659,585          95,914,896
1834         379,155,052          94,788,763
1835         405,403,051         101,350,762
1836         485,943,473         121,485,868
1837         455,084,445         113,771,111
1838         465,504,041         116,376,010
1839         528,493,842         132,123.460

    "Mr. Leatham," says Mr. Tooke, "gives the process by which,
upon the data furnished by the returns of stamps, he arrives at
these results; and I am disposed to think that they are as near
an approximation to the truth as the nature of the materials
admits of arriving at." -- Inquiry into the Currency Principle,
p. 26. Mr. Newmarch (Appendix No. 39 to Report of the Committee
on the Bank Acts in 1857, and History of Prices, vol. vi. p. 587)
shows grounds for the opinion that the total bill circulation in
1857 was not much less than 180 millions sterling, and that it
sometimes rises to 200 millions. 

5. On the Regulation of Currencies, p. 41.

