The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 14

Of Excess of Supply


    1. After the elementary exposition of the theory of money
contained in the last few chapters, we shall return to a question
in the general theory of Value, which could not be satisfactorily
discussed until the nature and operations of Money were in some
measure understood, because the errors against which we have to
contend mainly originate in a misunderstanding of those
operations. 
    We have seen that the value of everything gravitates towards
a certain medium point (which has been called the Natural Value),
namely, that at which it exchanges for every other thing in the
ratio of their cost of production. We have seen, too, that the
actual or market value coincides, or nearly so, with the natural
value, only on an average of years; and is continually either
rising above, or falling below it, from alterations in the
demand, or casual fluctuations in the supply: but that these
variations correct themselves, through the tendency of the supply
to accommodate itself to the demand which exists for the
commodity at its natural value. A general convergence thus
results from the balance of opposite divergences. Dearth, or
scarcity, on the one hand, and over-supply, or in mercantile
language, glut, on the other, are incident to all commodities. In
the first case, the commodity affords to the producers or
sellers, while the deficiency lasts, an unusually high rate of
profit: in the second, the supply being in excess of that for
which a demand exists at such a value as will afford the ordinary
profit, the sellers must be content with less, and must , in
extreme cases, submit to a loss. 
    Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent
inconvenience or loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in the
case of any one commodity whatever, many persons, including some
distinguished political economists, have thought that it may
exist with regard to all commodities; that there may be a general
over-production of wealth; a supply of commodities in the
aggregate, surpassing the demand; and a consequent depressed
condition of all classes of producers. Against this doctrine, of
which Mr. Malthus and Dr. Chalmers in this country, and M. de
Sismondi on the Continent, were the chief apostles, I have
already contended in the First Book;(1*) but it was not possible,
in that stage of our inquiry, to enter into a complete
examination of an error (as I conceive) essentially grounded on a
misunderstanding of the phenomena of Value and Price. The
doctrine appears to me to involve so much inconsistency in its
very conception, that I feel considerable difficulty in giving
any statement of it which shall be at once clear, and
satisfactory to its supporters. They agree in maintaining that
there may be, and sometimes is, an excess of productions in
general beyond the demand for them; that when this happens,
purchasers cannot be found at prices which will repay the cost of
production with a profit; that there ensues a general depression
of prices or values (they are seldom accurate in discriminating
between the two), so that producers, the more they produce, find
themselves the poorer, instead of richer; and Dr Chalmers
accordingly inculcates on capitalists the practice of a moral
restraint in reference to the pursuit of gain; while Sismondi
deprecates machinery, and the various inventions which increase
productive power. They both maintain that accumulation of capital
may proceed too fast, not merely for the moral, but for the
material interests of those who produce and accumulate; and they
enjoin the rich to guard against this evil by an ample
unproductive consumption. 

    2. When these writers speak of the supply of commodities as
outrunning the demand, it is not clear which of the two elements
of demand they have in view-the desire to possess, or the means
of purchase; whether their meaning is that there are, in such
cases, more consumable products in existence than the public
desires to consume, or merely more than it is able to pay for. In
this uncertainty, it is necessary to examine both suppositions.
    First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities
produced is not greater than the community would be glad to
consume: is it, in that case, possible that there should be a
deficiency of demand for all commodities, for want of the means
of payment? Those who think so cannot have considered what it is
which constitutes the means of payment for commodities. It is
simply commodities. Each person's means of paying for the
productions of other people consists of those which he himself
possesses. All sellers are inevitably and ex vi termini buyers.
Could we suddenly double the productive powers of the country, we
should double the supply of commodities in every market; but we
should, by the same stroke, double the purchasing power.
Everybody would bring a double demand as well as supply:
everybody would be able to buy twice as much, because every one
would have twice as much to offer in exchange. It is probable,
indeed, that there would now be a superfluity of certain things.
although the community would willingly double its aggregate
consumption, it may already have as much as it desires of some
commodities, and it may prefer to do more than double its
consumption of others, or to exercise its increased purchasing
power on some new thing. If so, the supply will adapt itself
accordingly, and the values of things will continue to conform to
their cost of production. At any rate, it is a sheer absurdity
that all things should fall in value, and that all producers
should, in consequence, be insufficiently remunerated. If values
remain the same, what becomes of prices is immaterial, since the
remuneration of producers does not depend on how much money, but
on how much of consumable articles, they obtain for their goods.
Besides, money is a commodity; and if all commodities are
supposed to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose money to be
doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than values
would. 

    3. A general over-supply , or excess of all commodities above
the demand, so far as demand consists in means of payment, is
thus shown to be an impossibility. But it may perhaps he supposed
that it is not the ability to purchase, but the desire to
possess, that falls short, and that the general produce of
industry may be greater than the community desires to consume --
the part, at least, of the community which has an equivalent to
give. It is evident enough, that produce makes a market for
produce, and that there is wealth in the country with which to
purchase all the wealth in the country; but those who have the
means, may not have the wants, and those who have the wants may
be without the means. A portion, therefore, of the commodities
produced may be unable to find a market, from the absence of
means in those who have the desire to consume, and the want of
desire in those who have the means. 
    This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and
does not, like that which we first examined, involve a
contradiction. There may easily be a greater quantity of any
particular commodity than is desired by those who have the
ability to purchase, and it is abstractedly conceivable that this
might be the case with all commodities. The error is in not
perceiving that though all who have an equivalent to give, might
be fully provided with every consumable article which they
desire, the fact that they go on adding to the production proves
that this is not actually the case. Assume the most favourable
hypothesis for the purpose, that of a limited community, every
member of which possesses as much of necessaries and of all known
luxuries as he desires: and since it is not conceivable that
persons whose wants were completely satisfied would labour and
economize to obtain what they did not desire, suppose that a
foreigner arrives and produces an additional quantity of
something of which there was already enough. Here, it will be
said, is over-production: true, I reply; over-production of that
particular article: the community wanted no more of that, but it
wanted something. The old inhabitants, indeed, wanted nothing;
but did not the foreigner himself want something? When he
produced the superfluous article, was he labouring without a
motive? He has produced, but the wrong thing instead of the
right. He wanted, perhaps, food, and has produced watches, with
which everybody was sufficiently supplied. The new comer brought
with him into the country a demand for commodities, equal to all
that he could produce by his industry, and it was his business to
see that the supply he brought should be suitable to that demand.
If he could not produce something capable of exciting a new want
or desire in the community, for the satisfaction of which some
one would grow more food and give it to him in exchange, he had
the alternative of growing food for himself; either on fresh
land, if there was any unoccupied, or as a tenant, or partner, or
servant, of some former occupier, willing to be partially
relieved from labour. He has produced a thing not wanted, instead
of what was wanted; and he himself, perhaps, is not the kind of
producer who is wanted; but there is no over-production;
production is not excessive, but merely ill assorted. We saw
before, that whoever brings additional commodities to the market,
brings an additional power of purchase; we now see that he brings
also an additional desire to consume; since if he had not that
desire, he would not have troubled himself to produce. Neither of
the elements of demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there is
an additional supply; though it is perfectly possible that the
demand may be for one thing, and the supply may unfortunately
consist of another. 
    Driven to his last retreat, an opponent may perhaps allege,
that there are persons who produce and accumulate from mere
habit; not because they have any object in growing richer, or
desire to add in any respect to their consumption, but from vis
inertiae. They continue producing because the machine is ready
mounted, and save and re-invest their savings because they have
nothing on which they care to expend them. I grant that this is
possible, and in some few instances probably happens; but these
do not in the smallest degree affect our conclusion. For, what do
these persons do with their savings? They invest them
productively. that is, expend them in employing labour. In other
words, having a purchasing power belonging to them, more than
they know what to do with, they make over the surplus of it for
the general benefit of the labouring class. Now, will that class
also not know what to do with it? Are we to suppose that they too
have their wants perfectly satisfied, and go on labouring from
mere habit? Until this is the case; until the working classes
have also reached the point of satiety-there will be no want of
demand for the produce of capital, however rapidly it may
accumulate: since, if there is nothing else for it to do, it can
always find employment in producing the necessaries or luxuries
of the labouring class. And when they too had no further desire
for necessaries or luxuries, they would take the benefit of any
further increase of wages by diminishing their work; so that the
over-production which then for the first time would be possible
in idea, could not even then take place in fact, for want of
labourers. Thus, in whatever manner the question is looked at,
even though we go to the extreme verge of possibility to invent a
supposition favourable to it, the theory of general
over-production implies an absurdity. 

    4. What then is it by which men who have reflected much on
economical phenomena, and have even contributed to throw new
light upon them by original speculations, have been led to
embrace so irrational a doctrine? I conceive them to have been
deceived by a mistaken interpretation of certain mercantile
facts. They imagined that the possibility of a general oversupply
of commodities was proved by experience. They believed that they
saw this phenomenon in certain conditions of the markets, the
true explanation of which is totally different. 
    I have already described the state of the markets for
commodities which accompanies what is termed a commercial crisis.
At such times there is really an excess of all commodities above
the money demand: in other words, there is an under-supply of
money. From the sudden annihilation of a great mass of credit,
every one dislikes to part with ready money, and many are anxious
to procure it at any sacrifice. Almost everybody therefore is a
seller, and there are scarcely any buyers; so that there may
really be, though only while the crisis lasts, an extreme
depression of general prices, from what may be indiscriminately
called a glut of commodities or a dearth of money. But it is a
great error to suppose, with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis
is the effect of a general excess of production. It is simply the
consequence of an excess of speculative purchases. It is not a
gradual advent of low prices, hut a sudden recoil from prices
extravagantly high: its immediate cause is a contraction of
credit, and the remedy is, not a dilution of supply , but the
restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this temporary
derangement of markets is an evil only because it is temporary.
The fall being solely of money prices, if prices did not rise
again no dealer would lose, since the smaller price would be
worth as much to him as the larger price was before. In no manner
does this phenomenon answer to the description which these
celebrated economists have given of the evil of over-production.
The permanent decline in the circumstances of producers, for want
of markets, which those writers contemplate, is a conception to
which the nature of a commercial crisis gives no support. 
    The other phenomenon from which the notion of a general
excess of wealth and superfluity of accumulation seems to derive
countenance, is one of a more permanent nature, namely, the fall
of profits and interest which naturally takes place with the
progress of population and production. The cause of this decline
of profit is the increased cost of maintaining labour, which
results from an increase of population and of the demand for
food, outstripping the advance of agricultural improvement. This
important feature in the economical progress of nations will
receive full consideration and discussion in the succeeding
Book.(2*) It is obviously a totally different thing from a want
of market for commodities, though often confounded with it in the
complaints of the producing and trading classes. The true
interpretation of the modern or present state of industrial
economy, is, that there is hardly any amount of business which
may not be done, if people will be content to do it on small
profits; and this, all active and intelligent persons in business
perfectly well know. but even those who comply with the
necessities of their time, grumble at what they comply with, and
wish that there were less capital, or as they express it, less
competition, in order that there might be greater profits. Low
profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency of
demand; and the production and accumulation which merely reduce
profits, cannot be called excess of supply or of production. What
the phenomenon really is, and its effects and necessary limits,
will be seen when we treat of that express subject. 
    I know not of any economical facts, except the two I have
specified, which can have given occasion to the opinion that a
general over-production of commodities ever presented itself in
actual experience. I am convinced that there is no fact in
commercial affairs, which, in order to its explanation, stands in
need of that chimerical supposition. 
    The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it
involves radically different conceptions of Political Economy,
especially in its practical aspect. On the one view, we have only
to consider how a sufficient production may be combined with the
best possible distribution; but on the other there is a third
thing to be considered-how a market can be created for produce,
or how production can be limited to the capabilities of the
market. Besides; a theory so essentially self-contradictory
cannot intrude itself without carrying confusion into the very
heart of the subject, and making it impossible even to conceive
with any distinctness many of the more complicated economical
workings of society. This error has been, I conceive, fatal to
the systems, as systems, of the three distinguished economists to
whom I before referred, Malthus, Chalmers, and Sismondi; all of
whom have admirably conceived and explained several of the
elementary theorems of political economy, but this fatal
misconception has spread itself like a veil between them and the
more difficult portions of the subject, not suffering one ray of
light to penetrate. Still more is this same confused idea
constantly crossing and bewildering the speculations of minds
inferior to theirs. It is but justice to two eminent names, to
call attention to the fact, that the merit of having placed this
most important point in its true light, belongs principally, on
the Continent, to the judicious J.B. Say, and in this country to
Mr Mill; who (besides the conclusive exposition which he gave of
the subject in his Elements of Political Economy) had set forth
the correct doctrine with great force and clearness in an early
pamphlet, called forth by a temporary controversy, and entitled,
"Commerce Defended;" the first of his writings which attained any
celebrity, and which he pried more as having been his first
introduction to the friendship of David Ricardo, the most valued
and most intimate friendship of his life. 

NOTES:

1. Supra, vol. i. pp. 66-8.

2. Infra, book iv. chap. 4.

