The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 5

Of Rent, in Its Relation to Value

    1. We have investigated the laws which determine the value of
two classes of commodities: the small class which, being limited
to a definite quantity, have their value entirely determined by
demand and supply, save that their cost of production (if they
have any) constitutes a minimum below which they cannot
permanently fall; and the large class, which can be multiplied ad
libitum by labour and capital, and of which the cost of
production fixes the maximum as well as the minimum at which they
can permanently exchange. But there is still a third kind of
commodities to be considered: those which have, not one, but
several costs of production: which can always be increased in
quantity by labour and capital, but not by the same amount of
labour and capital; of which so much may be produced at a given
cost, but a further quantity not without a greater cost. These
commodities form an intermediate class, partaking of the
character of both the others. The principal of them is
agricultural produce. We have already made abundant reference to
the fundamental truth, that in agriculture, the state of the art
being given, doubling the labour does not double the produce;
that if an increased quantity of produce is required, the
additional supply is obtained at a greater cost than the first.
Where a hundred quarters of corn are all that is at present
required from the lands of a given village, if the growth of
population made it necessary to raise a hundred more, either by
breaking up worse land now uncultivated, or by a more elaborate
cultivation of the land already under the plough, the additional
hundred, or some part of them at least, might cost double or
treble as much per quarter as the former supply. 
    If the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same
expense (only the best land being cultivated); and if that
expense would be remunerated with the ordinary profit by a price
of 20s. the quarter; the natural price of wheat, so long as no
more than that quantity was required, would be 20s.; and it could
only rise above, or fall below that price, from vicissitudes of
seasons, or other casual variations in supply. But if the
population of the district advanced, a time would arrive when
more than a hundred quarters would be necessary to feed it. We
must suppose that there is no access to any foreign supply. By
the hypothesis, no more than a hundred quarters can be produced
in the district, unless by either bringing worse land into
cultivation, or altering the system of culture to a more
expensive one. Neither of these things will be done without a
rise in price. ThiS rise of price will gradually be brought about
by the increasing demand. So long as the price has risen, but not
risen enough to repay with the ordinary profit the cost of
producing an additional quantity, the increased value of the
limited supply partakes of the nature of a scarcity value.
Suppose that it will not answer to cultivate the second best
land, or land of the second degree of remoteness, for a less
return than 25s. the quarter; and that this price is also
necessary to remunerate the expensive operations by which an
increased produce might be raised from land of the first quality.
If so, the price will rise, through the increased demand, until
it reaches 25s. That will now be the natural price; being the
price without which the quantity, for which society has a demand
at that price, will not be produced. At that price, however,
society can go on for some time longer; could go on perhaps for
ever, if population did not increase. The price, having attained
that point, will not again permanently recede (though it may fall
temporarily from accidental abundance); nor will it advance
further, so long as society can obtain the supply it requires
without a second increase of the cost of production. 
    I have made use of Price in this reasoning, as a convenient
symbol of Value, from the greater familiarity of the idea; and I
shall continue to do so as far as may appears to be necessary. 
    In the case supposed, different portions of the supply of
corn have different costs of production. Though the 20, or 50, or
150 quarters additional have been produced at a cost proportional
to 25s., the original hundred quarters per annum are still
produced at a cost only proportional to 20s. This is
self-evident, if the original and the additional supply are
produced on different qualities of land. It is equally true if
they are produced on the same land. Suppose that land of the best
quality, which produced 100 quarters at 20s., has been made to
produce 150 by an expensive process, which it would not answer to
undertake without a price of 25s. The cost which requires 25s. is
incurred for the sake of 50 quarters alone: the first hundred
might have continued for ever to be produced at the original
cost, and with the benefit, on that quantity, of the whole rise
of price caused by the increased demand: no one, therefore, will
incur the additional expense for the sake of the additional
fifty, unless they alone will pay for the whole of it. The fifty,
therefore, will be produced at their natural price, proportioned
to the cost of their production; while the other hundred will now
bring in 5s. a quarter more than their natural price-than the
price corresponding to, and sufficing to remunerate, their lower
cost of production. 
    If the production of any, even the smallest, portion of the
supply, requires as a necessary condition a certain price, that
price will be obtained for all the rest. We are not able to buy
one loaf cheaper than another because the corn from which it was
made, being grown on a richer soil, has cost less to the grower.
The value, therefore, of an article (meaning its natural, which
is the same with its average value) is determined by the cost of
that portion of the supply which is produced and brought to
market at the greatest expense. This is the Law of Value of the
third of the three classes into which all commodities are
divided. 

    2. If the portion of produce raised in the most unfavourable
circumstances, obtains a value proportioned to its cost of
production; all the portions raised in more favorable
circumstances, selling as they must do at the same value, obtain
a value more than proportioned to their cost of production. Their
value is not, correctly speaking, a scarcity value, for it is
determined by the circumstances of the production of the
commodity, and not by the degree of dearness necessary for
keeping down the demand to the level of a limited supply. The
owners, however, of those portions of the produce enjoy a
privilege; they obtain a value which yields them more than the
ordinary profit. If this advantage depends upon any special
exemption, such as being free from a tax, or upon any personal
advantages, physical or mental, Or any peculiar process only
known to themselves, or upon the possession of a greater capital
than other people, or upon various other things which might be
enumerated, they retain it to themselves as an extra gain, over
and above the general profits of capital, of the nature, in some
sort, of a monopoly profit. But when, as in the case which we are
more particularly considering, the advantage depends on the
possession of a natural agent of peculiar quality, as for
instance of more fertile land than that which determines the
general value of the commodity; and when this natural agent is
not owned by themselves; the person who does own it, is able to
exact from them, in the form of rent, the whole extra gain
derived from its use. We are thus brought by another road to the
Law of Rent, investigated in the concluding chapter of the Second
Book. Rent, we again see, is the difference between the unequal
returns to different parts of the capital employed on the soil.
Whatever surplus any portion of agricultural capital produces,
beyond what is produced by the same amount of capital on the
worst soil, or under the most expensive mode of cultivation,
which the existing demands of society compel a recourse to; that
surplus will naturally be paid as rent from that capital, to the
owner of the land on which it is employed. 
    It was long thought by political economists, among the rest
even by Adam Smith, that the produce of land is always at a
monopoly value, because (they said) in addition to the ordinary
rate of profit, it always yields something further for rent. This
we now see to be erroneous. A thing cannot be at a monopoly
value, when its supply can be increased to an indefinite extent
if we are only willing to incur the cost. If no more corn than
the existing quantity is grown, it is because the value has not
risen high enough to remunerate any one for growing it. Any land
(not reserved for other uses, or for pleasure ) which at the
existing price, and by the existing processes, will yield the
ordinary profit, is tolerably certain, unless some artificial
hindrance intervenes, to be cultivated, although nothing may be
left for rent. As long as there is any land fit for cultivation,
which at the existing price cannot be profitably cultivated at
all, there must be some land a little better, which will yield
the ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent: and that land,
if within the boundary of a farm, will be cultivated by the
farmer; if not so, probably by the proprietor, or by some other
person on sufferance. Some such land at least, under cultivation,
there can scarcely fail to be. 
    Rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production
which determines the value of agricultural produce. Circumstances
no doubt may be conceived in which it might do so, and very
largely too. We can imagine a country so fully peopled, and with
all its cultivable soil so completely occupied, that to produce
any additional quantity would require more labour than the
produce would feed: and if we suppose this to be the condition of
the whole world, or of a country debarred from foreign supply,
then, if population continued increasing, both the land and its
produce would really rise to a monopoly or scarcity price. But
this state of things never can have really existed anywhere,
unless possibly in some small island cut off from the rest of the
world; nor is there any danger whatever that it should exist. It
certainly exists in no known region at present. Monopoly, we have
seen, can take effect on value, only through limitation of
supply. In all countries of any extent there is more cultivable
land than is yet cultivated; and while there is any such surplus,
it is the same thing, so far as that quality of land is
concerned, as if there were an infinite quantity. What is
practically limited in supply is only the better qualities; and
even for those, so much rent cannot be demanded as would bring in
the competition of the lands not yet in cultivation; the rent of
a piece of land must be somewhat less than the whole excess of
its productiveness over that of the best land which it is not yet
profitable to cultivate; that is, it must be about equal to the
excess above the worst land which it is profitable to cultivate.
The land or the capital most unfavourably circumstanced among
those actually employed, pays no rent; and that land or capital
determines the cost of production which regulates the value of
the whole produce. Thus rent is, as we have already seen, no
cause of value, but the price of the privilege which the
inequality of the returns to different portions of agricultural
produce confers on all except the least favoured portions. 
    Rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different
farming capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate all
extra gains occasioned by superiority of natural advantages. If
all landlords were unanimously to forego their rent, they would
but transfer it to the farmers, without benefiting the consumer;
for the existing price of corn would still be an indispensable
condition of the production of part of the existing supply, and
if a part obtained that price the whole would obtain it. Rent,
therefore, unless artificially increased by restrictive laws, is
no burthen on the consumer: it does not raise the price of corn,
and is no otherwise a detriment to the public, than inasmuch as
if the state had retained it, or imposed an equivalent in the
shape of a land-tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to
general instead of private advantage. 

    3. Agricultural productions are not the only commodities
which have several different costs of production at once, and
which, in consequence of that difference, and in proportion to
it, afford a rent. Mines are also an instance. Almost all kinds
of raw material extracted from the interior of the earthmetal,
coals, precious stones, &c., are obtained from mines differing
considerably in fertility, that is, yielding very different
quantities of the product to the same quantity of labour and
capital. This being the case, it is an obvious question, why are
not the most fertile mines so worked as to supply the whole
market? No such question can arise as to land; it being
self-evident, that the most fertile lands could not possibly be
made to supply the whole demand of a fully-peopled country; and
even of what they do yield, a part is extorted from them by a
labour and outlay as great as that required to grow the same
amount on worse land. But it is not so with mines; at least, not
universally. There are, perhaps, cases in which it is impossible
to extract from a particular vein, in a given time, more than a
certain quantity of ore, because there is only a limited surface
of the vein exposed, on which more than a certain number of
labourers cannot be simultaneously employed. But this is not true
of all mines. In collieries, for example, some other cause of
limitation must be sought for. In some instances the owners limit
the quantity raised, in order not too rapidly to exhaust the
mine.. in others there are said to be combinations of owners, to
keep up a monopoly price by limiting the production. Whatever be
the causes, it is a fact that mines of different degrees of
richness are in operation, and since the value of the produce
must be proportional to the cost of production at the worst mine
(fertility and situation taken together), it is more than
proportional to that of the best. All mines superior in produce
to the worst actually worked, will yield, therefore, a rent equal
to the excess. They may yield more; and the worst mine may itself
yield a rent. Mines being comparatively few, their qualities do
not graduate gently into one another, as the qualities of land
do; and the demand may be such as to keep the value of the
produce considerably above the cost of production at the worst
mine now worked, without being sufficient to bring into operation
a still worse. During the interval, the produce is really at a
scarcity value. 
    Fisheries are another example. Fisheries in the open sea are
not appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost always
are so, and likewise oyster-beds or other particular fishing
grounds on coasts. We may take salmon fisheries as an example of
the whole class. Some rivers are far more productive in salmon
than others. None, however, without being exhausted, can supply
more than a very limited demand. The demand of a country like
England can only be supplied by taking salmon from many different
rivers of unequal productiveness, and the value must be
sufficient to repay the cost of obtaining the fish from the least
productive of these. All others, therefore, will if appropriated
afford a rent equal to the value of their superiority. Much
higher than this it cannot be, if there are salmon rivers
accessible which from distance or inferior productiveness have
not yet contributed to supply the market. If there are not, the
value, doubtless, may rise to a scarcity rate, and the worst
fisheries in use may then yield a considerable rent. 
    Both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural order
of events is liable to be interrupted by the opening of a new
mine, or a new fishery, of superior quality to some of those
already in use. The first effect of such an incident is an
increase of the supply; which of course lowers the value to call
forth an increased demand. This reduced value may be no longer
sufficient to remunerate the worst of the existing mines or
fisheries, and these may consequently be abandoned. If the
superior mines or fisheries, with the addition of the one newly
opened, produce as much of the commodity as is required at the
lower value corresponding to their lower cost of production, the
fall of value will be permanent, and there will be a
corresponding fall in the rents of those mines or fisheries which
are not abandoned. In this case, when things have permanently
adjusted themselves, the result will be, that the scale of
qualities which supply the market will have been cut short at the
lower end, while a new insertion will have been made in the scale
at some point higher up; and the worst mine or fishery in use --
the one which regulates the rents of the superior qualities and
the value of the commodity -- will be a mine or fishery of better
quality than that by which they were previously regulated. 
    Land is used for other purposes than agriculture, especially
for residence; and when so used, yields a rent, determined by
principles similar to those already laid down. The ground rent of
a building, and the rent of a garden or park attached to it, will
not be less than the rent which the same land would afford in
agriculture: but may be greater than this to an indefinite
amount; the surplus being either in consideration of beauty or of
convenience, the convenience often consisting in superior
facilities for pecuniary gain. Sites of remarkable beauty are
generally limited in supply, and therefore, if in great demand,
are at a scarcity value. Sites superior only in convenience are
governed as to their value by the ordinary principles of rent.
The ground rent of a house in a small village is but little
higher than the rent of a similar patch of ground in the open
fields: but that of a shop in Cheapside will exceed these, by the
whole amount at which people estimate the superior facilities of
money-making in the more crowded place. The rents of wharfage,
dock and harbour room, waterpower, and many other privileges, may
be analysed on similar principles. 

    4. Cases of extra profit analogous to rent, are more frequent
in the transactions of industry than is sometimes supposed. Take
the case, for example, of a patent, or exclusive privilege for
the use of a process by which cost of production is lessened. If
the value of the product continues to be regulated by what it
costs to those who are obliged to persist in the old process, the
patentee will make an extra profit equal to the advantage which
his process possesses over theirs. This extra profit is
essentially similar to rent, and sometimes even assumes the form
of it; the patentee allowing to other producers the use of his
privilege, in consideration of an annual payment. So long as he,
and those whom he associates in the privilege, do not produce
enough to supply the whole market, so long the original cost of
production, being the necessary condition of producing a part,
will regulate the value of the whole; and the patentee will be
enabled to keep up his rent to a full equivalent for the
advantage which his process gives him. In the commencement indeed
he will probably forego a part of this advantage for the sake of
underselling others: the increased supply which he brings forward
will lower the value, and make the trade a bad one for those who
do not share in the privilege: many of whom therefore will
gradually retire, or restrict their operations, or enter into
arrangements with the patentee: as his supply increases theirs
will diminish, the value meanwhile continuing slightly depressed.
But if he stops short in his operations before the market is
wholly supplied by the new process, things will again adjust
themselves to what was the natural value before the invention was
made, and the benefit of the improvement will accrue solely to
the patentee. 
    The extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains through
superior talents for business, or superior business arrangements,
are very much of a similar kind. If all his competitors had the
same advantages, and used them, the benefit would be transferred
to their customers, through the diminished value of the article:
he only retains it for himself because he is able to bring his
commodity to market at a lower cost, while its value is
determined by a higher. All advantages, in fact, which one
competitor has over another, whether natural or acquired, whether
personal or the result of social arrangements, bring the
commodity, so far, into the Third Class, and assimilate the
possessor of the advantage to a receiver of rent. Wages and
profits represent the universal elements in production, while
rent may be taken to represent the differential and peculiar: any
difference in favour of certain producers, or in favour of
production in certain circumstances, being the source of a gain,
which, though not called rent unless paid periodically by one
person to another, is governed by laws entirely the same with it.
The price paid for a differential advantage in producing a
commodity, cannot enter into the general cost of production of
the commodity. 
    A commodity may no doubt, in some contingencies, yield a rent
even under the most disadvantageous circumstances of its
production: but only when it is, for the time, in the condition
of those commodities which are absolutely limited in supply, and
is therefore selling at a scarcity value; which never is, nor has
been, nor can be, a permanent condition of any of the great
rent-yielding commodities: unless through their approaching
exhaustion, if they are mineral products (coal for example), or
through an increase of population, continuing after a further
increase of production becomes impossible: a contingency, which
the almost inevitable progress of human culture and improvement
in the long interval which has first to elapse, forbids us to
consider as probable. 

