The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 3

Of Cost of Production in Its Relation to Value

    1. When the production of a commodity is the effect of labour
and expenditure, whether the commodity is susceptible of
unlimited multiplication or not, there is a minimum value which
is the essential condition of its being permanently produced. The
value at any particular time is the result of supply and demand;
and is always that which is necessary to create a market for the
existing supply. But unless that value is sufficient to repay the
Cost of Production, and to afford, besides, the ordinary
expectation of profit, the commodity will not continue to be
produced. Capitalists will not go on permanently producing at a
loss. They will not even go on producing at a profit less than
they can live on. Persons whose capital is already embarked, and
cannot be easily extricated, will persevere for a considerable
time without profit, and have been known to persevere even at a
loss, in hope of better times. But they will not do so
indefinitely, or when there is nothing to indicate that times are
likely to improve. No new capital will be invested in an
employment, unless there be an expectation not only of some
profit, but of a profit as great (regard being had to the degree
of eligibility of the employment in other respects) as can be
hoped for in any other occupation at that time and place. When
such profit is evidently not to be had, if people do not actually
withdraw their capital, they at least abstain from replacing it
when consumed. The cost of production, together with the ordinary
profit, may therefore be called the necessary price, or value, of
all things made by labour and capital. Nobody willingly produces
in the prospect of loss. Whoever does so, does it under a
miscalculation, which he corrects as fast as he is able. 
    When a commodity is not only made by labour and capital, but
can be made by them in indefinite quantity, this Necessary Value,
the minimum with which the producers will be content, is also, if
competition is free and active, the maximum which they can
expect. If the value of a commodity is such that it repays the
cost of production not only with the customary, but with a higher
rate of profit, capital rushes to share in this extra gain, and
by increasing the supply of the article, reduces its value. This
is not a mere supposition or surmise, but a fact familiar to
those conversant with commercial operations. Whenever a new line
of business presents itself, offering a hope of unusual profits,
and whenever any established trade or manufacture is believed to
be yielding a greater profit than customary, there is sure to be
in a short time so large a production or importation of the
commodity, as not only destroys the extra profit, but generally
goes beyond the mark, and sinks the value as much too low as it
had before been raised too high; until the oversupply is
corrected by a total or partial suspension of further production.
As already intimated,(1*) these variations in the quantity
produced do not presuppose or require that any person should
change his employment. Those whose business is thriving, increase
their produce by availing themselves more largely of their
credit, while those who are not making the ordinary profit,
restrict their operations, and (in manufacturing phrase) work
short time. In this mode is surely and speedily effected the
equalization, not of profits perhaps, but of the expectations of
profit, in different occupations. 
    As a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one
another at such values as will enable each producer to be repaid
the cost of production with the ordinary profit; in other words,
such as will give to all producers the same rate of profit on
their outlay. But in order that the profit may be equal where the
outlay, that is, the cost of production, is equal, things must on
the average exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost
of production: things of which the cost of production is the
same, must be of the same value. For only thus will an equal
outlay yield an equal return. If a farmer with a capital equal to
1 000 quarters of corn, can produce 1 200 quarters, yielding him
a profit of 20 per cent; whatever else can be produced in the
same time by a capital of 1000 quarters, must be worth, that is,
must exchange for, 1200 quarters, otherwise the producer would
gain either more or less than 20 per cent. 
    Adam Smith and Ricardo have called that value of a thing
which is proportional to its cost of production, its Natural
Value (or its Natural Price). They meant by this, the point about
which the value oscillates, and to which it always tends to
return; the centre value, towards which, as Adam Smith expresses
it, the market value of a thing is constantly gravitating; and
any deviation from which is but a temporary irregularity, which,
the moment it exists, sets forces in motion tending to correct
it. On an average of years sufficient to enable the oscillations
on one side of the central line to be compensated by those on the
other, the market value agrees with the natural value; but it
very seldom coincides exactly with it at any particular time. The
sea everywhere tends to a level; but it never is at an exact
level; its surface is always ruffled by waves, and often agitated
by storms. It is enough that no point, at least in the open sea,
is permanently higher than another. Each place is alternately
elevated and depressed; but the ocean preserves its level. 

    2. The latent influence by which the values of things are
made to conform in the long run to the cost of production, is the
variation that would otherwise take place in the supply of the
commodity. The supply would be increased if the thing continued
to sell above the ratio of its cost of production, and would be
diminished if it fell below that ratio. But we must not therefore
suppose it to be necessary that the supply should actually be
either diminished or increased. Suppose that the cost of
production of a thing is cheapened by some mechanical invention,
or increased by a tax. The value of the thing would in a little
time, if not immediately, fall in the one case, and rise in the
other; and it would do so, because if it did not, the supply
would in the one case be increased, until the price fell, in the
other diminished, until it rose. For this reason, and from the
erroneous notion that value depends on the proportion between the
demand and the supply, many persons suppose that this proportion
must be altered whenever there is any change in the value of the
commodity; that the value cannot fall through a diminution of the
cost of production, unless the supply is permanently increased;
nor rise, unless the supply is permanently diminished. But this
is not the fact: there is no need that there should be any actual
alteration of supply; and when there is, the alteration, if
permanent, is not the cause, but the consequence of the
alteration in value. If, indeed, the supply could not be
increased, no diminution in the cost of production would lower
the value: but there is by no means any necessity that it should.
The mere possibility often suffices; the dealers are aware of
what would happen, and their mutual competition makes them
anticipate the result by lowering the price. Whether there will
be a greater permanent supply of the commodity after its
production has been cheapened, depends on quite another question,
namely, on whether a greater quantity is wanted at the reduced
value. Most commonly a greater quantity is wanted, but not
necessarily. "A man," says Mr De Quincey, (2*) "buys an article
of instant applicability to his own purposes the more readily and
the more largely as it happens to be cheaper. Silk handkerchiefs
having fallen to half-price, he will buy, perhaps, in threefold
quantity; but he does not buy more steam-engines because the
price is lowered. His demand for steam-engines is almost always
predetermined by the circumstances of his situation. So far as he
considers the cost at all, it is much more the cost of working
this engine than the cost upon its purchase. But there are many
articles for which the market is absolutely and merely limited by
a pre-existing system, to which those articles are attached as
subordinate parts or members. How could we force the dials or
faces of timepieces by artificial cheapness to sell more
plentifully than the inner works or movements of such timepieces?
Could the sale of wine-vaults be increased without increasing the
sale of wine? Or the tools of shipwrights find an enlarged market
whilst shipbuilding was stationary?.... Offer to a town of 3000
inhabitants a stock of hearses, no cheapness will tempt that town
into buying more than one. Offer a stock of yachts, the chief
cost lies in manning, victualling, repairing; no diminution upon
the mere price to a purchaser will tempt into the market any man
whose habits and propensities had not already disposed him to
such a purchase. So of professional costume for bishops, lawyers,
students at Oxford." Nobody doubts, however, that the price and
value of all these things would be eventually lowered by any
diminution of their cost of production; and lowered through the
apprehension entertained of new competitors, and an increased,
supply. though the great hazard to which a new competitor would
expose himself, in an article not susceptible of any considerable
extension of its market, would enable the established dealers to
maintain their original prices much longer than they could do in
an article offering more encouragement to competition. 
    Again, reverse the case, and suppose the cost of production
increased, as for example by laying a tax on the commodity. The
value would rise; and that, probably, immediately. Would the
supply be diminished? Only if the increase of value diminished
the demand. Whether this effect followed, would soon appear, and
if it did, the value would recede somewhat, from excess of
supply, until the production was reduced, and would then rise
again. There are many articles for which it requires a very
considerable rise of price, materially to reduce the demand; in
particular, articles of necessity, such as the habitual food of
the people; in England, wheaten bread: of which there is probably
almost as much consumed, at the present cost price, as there
would be with the present population at a price considerably
lower. Yet it is especially in such things that dearness or high
price is popularly confounded with scarcity. Food may be dear
from scarcity, as after a bad harvest; but the dearness (for
example) which is the effect of taxation, or of corn laws, has
nothing whatever to do with insufficient supply: such causes do
not much diminish the quantity of food in a country. it is other
things rather than food that are diminished in quantity by them,
since, those who pay more for food not having so much to expend
otherwise, the production of other things contracts itself to the
limits of a smaller demand. 
    It is, therefore, strictly correct to say, that the value of
things which can be increased in quantity at pleasure, does not
depend (except accidentally, and during the time necessary for
production to adjust itself,) upon demand and supply; on the
contrary, demand and supply depend upon it. There is a demand for
a certain quantity of the commodity at its natural or cost value,
and to that the supply in the long run endeavours to conform.
When at any time it fails of so conforming, it is either from
miscalculation, or from a change in some of the elements of the
problem: either in the natural value, that is, in the cost of
production; or in the demand, from an alteration in public taste
or in the number or wealth of the consumers. These causes of
disturbance are very liable to occur, and when any one of them
does occur, the market value of the article ceases to agree with
the natural value. The real law of demand and supply, the
equation between them, still holds good: if a value different
from the natural value be necessary to make the demand equal to
the supply, the market value will deviate from the natural value;
but only for a time; for the permanent tendency of supply is to
conform itself to the demand which is found by experience to
exist for the commodity when selling at its natural value. If the
supply is either more or less than this, it is so accidentally,
and affords either more or less than the ordinary rate of profit;
which, under free and active competition, cannot long continue to
he the case. 
    To recapitulate: demand and supply govern the value of all
things which cannot be indefinitely increased; except that even
for them, when produced by industry, there is a minimum value,
determined by the cost of production. But in all things which
admit of indefinite multiplication, demand and supply only
determine the perturbations of value, during a period which
cannot exceed the length of time necessary for altering the
supply. While thus ruling the oscillations of value, they
themselves obey a superior force, which makes value gravitate
towards Cost of Production, and which would settle it and keep it
there, if fresh disturbing influences were not continuity arising
to make it again deviate. To pursue the same strain of metaphor,
demand and supply always rush to an equilibrium, but the
condition of stable equilibrium is when things exchange for each
other according to their cost of production, or, in the
expression we have used, when things are at their Natural Value. 

NOTES:

1. Supra, p. 407.

2. Logic of Political Economy, pp. 230-1.

