The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 7

Of Money

    1. Having proceeded thus far in ascertaining the general laws
of Value, without introducing the idea of Money (except
occasionally for illustration,) it is time that we should now
superadd that idea, and consider in what manner the principles of
the mutual interchange of commodities are affected by the use of
what is termed a Medium of Exchange.
     In order to understand the manifold functions of a
Circulating Medium, there is no better way than to consider what
are the principal inconveniences which we should experience if we
had not such a medium. The first and most obvious would be the
want of a common measure for values of different sorts. If a
tailor had only coats, and wanted to buy bread or a horse, it
would be very troublesome to ascertain how much bread he ought to
obtain for a coat, or how many coats he should give for a horse.
The calculation must be recommenced on different data, every time
he bartered his coats for a different kind of article; and there
could be no current price, or regular quotations of value.
Whereas now each thing has a current price in money, and he gets
over all difficulties by reckoning his coat at 4l. or 5l., and a
four-pound loaf at 6d. or 7d. As it is much easier to compare
different lengths by expressing them in a common language of feet
and inches, so it is much easier to compare values by means of a
common language of pounds, shillings, and pence. In no other way
can values be arranged one above another in a scale; in no other
can a person conveniently calculate the sum of his possessions;
and it is easier to ascertain and remember the relations of many
things to one thing, than their innumerable cross relations with
one another. This advantage of having a common language in which
values may be expressed, is, even by itself, so important, that
some such mode of expressing and computing them would probably be
used even if a pound or a shilling did not express any real
thing, but a mere unit of calculation. It is said that there are
African tribes in which this somewhat artificial contrivance
actually prevails. They calculate the value of things in a sort
of money of account, called macutes. They say, one thing is worth
ten macutes, another fifteen, another twenty.(1*) There is no
real thing called a macute: it is a conventional unit, for the
more convenient comparison of things with one another. 
    This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable part of
the economical benefits derived from the use of money. The
inconveniences of barter are so great, that without some more
commodious means of effecting exchanges, the division of
employments could hardly have been carried to any considerable
extent. A tailor, who had nothing but coats, might starve before
he could find any person having bread to sell who wanted a coat:
besides, he would not want as much bread at a time as would be
worth a coat, and the coat could not be divided. Every person,
therefore, would at all times hasten to dispose of his commodity
in exchange for anything which, though it might not be fitted to
his own immediate wants, was in great and general demand, and
easily divisible, so that he might be sure of being able to
purchase with it whatever was offered for sale. The primary
necessaries of life possess these properties in a high degree.
Bread is extremely divisible, and an object of universal desire.
Still, this is not the sort of thing required : for, of food,
unless in expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to possess
more at once, than is wanted for immediate consumption; so that a
person is never sure of finding an immediate purchaser for
articles of food; and unless soon disposed of, most of them
perish. The thing which people would select to keep by them for
making purchases, must be one which, besides being divisible and
generally desired, does not deteriorate by keeping. This reduces
the choice to a small number of articles. 

    2. By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very
early period, fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold and
silver, to serve this purpose. No other substances unite the
necessary qualities in so great a degree, with so many
subordinate advantages. Next to food and clothing, and in some
climates even before clothing, the strongest inclination in a
rude state of society is for personal ornament, and for the kind
of distinction which is obtained by rarity or costliness in such
ornaments. After the immediate necessities of life were
satisfied, every one was eager to accumulate as great a store as
possible of things at once costly and ornamental; which were
chiefly gold, silver, and jewels. These were the things which it
most pleased every one to possess, and which there was most
certainty of finding others willing to receive in exchange for
any kind of produce. They were among the most imperishable of all
substances. They were also portable, and containing great value
in small bulk, were easily hid; a consideration of much
importance in an age of insecurity. Jewels are inferior to gold
and silver in the quality of divisibility; and are of very
various qualities, not to be accurately discriminated without
great trouble. Gold and silver are eminently divisible, and when
pure, always of the same quality; and their purity may be
ascertained and certified by a public authority. Accordingly,
though furs have been employed as money in some countries, cattle
in others, in Chinese Tartary cubes of tea closely pressed
together, the shell called cowries on the coast of Western
Africa, and in Abyssinia at this day blocks of rock salt; though
even of metals, the less costly have sometimes been chosen, as
iron in Lacedaemon from an ascetic policy, copper in the early
Roman republic from the poverty of the people; gold and silver
have been generally preferred by nations which were able to
obtain them, either by industry, commerce, or conquest. To the
qualities which originally recommended them, another came to be
added, the importance of which only unfolded itself by degrees.
Of all commodities, they are among the least influenced by any of
the causes which produce fluctuations of value. No commodity is
quite free from such fluctuations. Gold and silver have
sustained, since the beginning of history, one great permanent
alteration of value, from the discovery of the American mines;
and some temporary variations, such as that which, in the last
great war, was produced by the absorption of the metals in
hoards, and in the military chests of the immense armies
constantly in the field. In the present age the opening of new
sources of supply, so abundant as the Ural mountains, California,
and Australia, may be the commencement of another period of
decline, on the limits of which it would be useless at present to
speculate. But on the whole, no commodities are so little exposed
to causes of variation. They fluctuate less than almost any other
things in their cost of production. And from their durability,
the total quantity in existence is at all times so great in
proportion to the annual supply, that the effect on value even of
a change in the cost of production is not sudden: a very long
time being required to diminish materially the quantity in
existence, and even to increase it very greatly not being a rapid
process. Gold and silver, therefore, are more fit than any other
commodity to be the subject of engagements for receiving or
paying a given quantity at some distant period. If the engagement
were made in corn, a failure of crops might increase the burthen
of the payment in one year to fourfold what was intended, or an
exuberant harvest sink it in another to one-fourth. If stipulated
in cloth, some manufacturing invention might permanently reduce
the payment to a tenth of its original value. Such things have
occurred even in the case of payments stipulated in gold and
silver; but the great fall of their value after the discovery of
America, is, as yet, the only authenticated instance; and in this
case the change was extremely gradual, being spread over a period
of many years. 
    When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of
exchange, by becoming the things for which people generally sold,
and with which they generally bought, whatever they had to sell
or to buy; the contrivance of coining obviously suggested itself.
By this process the metal was divided into convenient portions,
of any degree of smallness, and bearing a recognised proportion
to one another; and the trouble was saved of weighing and
assaying at every change of possessors, an inconvenience which on
the occasion of small purchases would soon have become
insupportable. Governments found it their interest to take the
operation into their own hands, and to interdict all coining by
private persons; indeed, their guarantee was often the only one
which would have been relied on, a reliance however which very
often it ill deserved; profligate governments having until a very
modern period seldom scrupled, for the sake of robbing their
creditors, to confer on all other debtors a licence to rob
theirs, by the shallow and impudent artifice of lowering the
standard; that least covert of all modes of knavery, which
consists in calling a shilling a pound, that a debt of one
hundred pounds may be cancelled by the payment of a hundred
shillings. It would have been as simple a plan, and would have
answered the purpose as well, to have enacted that "a hundred"
should always be interpreted to mean five, which would have
affected the same reduction in all pecuniary contracts, and would
not have been at all more shameless. Such strokes of policy have
not wholly ceased to be recommended, but they have ceased to be
practised; except occasionally through the medium of paper money,
in which case the character of the transaction, from the greater
obscurity of the subject, is a little less barefaced. 

    3. Money, when its use has grown habitual, is the medium
through which the incomes of the different members of the
community are distributed to them, and the measure by which they
estimate their possessions. As it is always by means of money
that people provide for their different necessities, there grows
up in their minds a powerful association leading them to regard
money as wealth in a more peculiar sense than any other article;
and even those who pass their lives in the production of the most
useful objects, acquire the habit of regarding those objects as
chiefly important by their capacity of being exchanged for money.
A person who parts with money to obtain commodities, unless he
intends to sell them, appears to the imagination to be making a
worse bargain than a person who parts with commodities to get
money; the one seems to be spending his means, the other adding
to them. Illusions which, though now in some measure dispelled,
were long powerful enough to overmaster the mind of every
politician, both speculative and practical, in Europe. 
    It must be evident, however, that the mere introduction of a
particular mode of exchanging things for one another, by first
exchanging a thing for money, and then exchanging the money for
something else, makes no difference in the essential character of
transactions. It is not with money that things are really
purchased. Nobody's income (except that of the gold or silver
miner) is derived from the precious metals. The pounds or
shillings which a person receives weekly or yearly, are not what
constitutes his income; they are a sort of tickets or orders
which he can present for payment at any shop he pleases, and
which entitle him to receive a certain value of any commodity
that he makes choice of. The farmer pays his labourers and his
landlord in these tickets, as the most convenient plan for
himself and them; but their real income is their share of his
corn, cattle, and hay, and it makes no essential difference
whether he distributes it to them directly, or sells it for them
and gives them the price; but as they would have to sell it for
money if he did not, and as he is a seller at any rate, it best
suits the purposes of all, that he should sell their share along
with his own, and leave the labourers more leisure for work and
the landlord for being idle. The capitalists, except those who
are producers of the precious metals, derive no part of their
income from those metals, since they only get them by buying them
with their own produce : while all other persons have their
incomes paid to them by the capitalists, or by those who have
received payment from the capitalists, and as the capitalists
have nothing, from the first, except their produce, it is that
and nothing else which supplies all incomes furnished by them.
There cannot, in short, be intrinsically a more insignificant
thing, in the economy of society, than money; except in the
character of a contrivance for sparing time and labour. It is a
machine for doing quickly and commodiously, what would be done,
though less quickly and commodiously, without it: and like many
other kinds of machinery, it only exerts a distinct and
independent influence of its own when it gets out of order. 
    The introduction of money does not interfere with the
operation of any of the Laws of Value laid down in the preceding
chapters. The reasons which make the temporary or market value of
things depend on the demand and supply, and their average and
permanent values upon their cost of production, are as applicable
to a money system as to a system of barter. Things which by
barter would exchange for one another, will, if sold for money,
sell for an equal amount of it, and so will exchange for one
another still, though the process of exchanging them will consist
of two operations instead of only one. The relations of
commodities to one another remain unaltered by money: the only
new relation introduced, is their relation to money itself; how
much or how little money they will exchange for; in other words,
how the Exchange Value of money itself is determined. And this is
not a question of any difficulty, when the illusion is dispelled,
which caused money to be looked upon as a peculiar thing, not
governed by the same laws as other things. Money is a commodity,
and its value is determined like that of other commodities,
temporarily by demand and supply, permanently and on the average
by cost of production. The illustration of these principles,
considered in their application to money, must be given in some
detail, on account of the confusion which, in minds not
scientifically instructed on the subject, envelopes the whole
matter; partly from a lingering remnant of the old misleading
associations, and partly from the mass of vapoury and baseless
speculation with which this, more than any other topic of
political economy, has in latter times become surrounded. I shall
therefore treat of the Value of Money in a chapter apart. 

NOTES:

1. Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, liv. xxii, ch. 8.

