The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3, Exchange

Chapter 1

Of Value


    1. The subject on which we are now about to enter fills so
important and conspicuous a position in political economy, that
in the apprehension of some thinkers its boundaries confound
themselves with those of the science itself. One eminent writer
has proposed as a name for Political Economy, "Catallactics," or
the science of exchanges: by others it has been called the
Science of Values. If these denominations had appeared to me
logically correct, I must have placed the discussion of the
elementary laws of value at the commencement of our inquiry,
instead of postponing it to the Third Part; and the possibility
of so long deferring it is alone a sufficient proof that this
view of the nature of Political Economy is too confined. It is
true that in the preceding Books we have not escaped the
necessity of anticipating some small portion of the theory of
Value, especially as to the value of labour and of land. It is
nevertheless evident, that of the two great departments of
Political Economy, the production of wealth and its distribution,
the consideration of Value has to do with the latter alone; and
with that, only so far as competition, and not usage or custom,
is the distributing agency. The conditions and laws of Production
would be the same as they are, if the arrangements of society did
not depend on Exchange, or did not admit of it. Even in the
present system of industrial life, in which employments are
minutely subdivided, and all concerned in production depend for
their remuneration on the price of a particular commodity,
exchange is not the fundamental law of the distribution of the
produce, no more than roads and carriages are the essential laws
of motion, but merely a part of the machinery for effecting it.
To confound these ideas, seems to me, not only a logical, but a
practical blunder. It is a case of the error too common in
political economy, of not distinguishing between necessities
arising from the nature of things, and those created by social
arrangements: an error, which appears to me to be at all times
producing two opposite mischiefs; on the one hand, causing
political economists to class the merely temporary truths of
their subject among its permanent and universal laws; and on the
other, leading many persons to mistake the permanent laws of
Production (such as those on which the necessity is grounded of
restraining population) for temporary accidents arising from the
existing constitution of society-which those who would frame a
new system of social arrangements, are at liberty to disregard. 
    In a state of society, however, in which the industrial
system is entirely founded on purchase and sale, each individual,
for the most part, living not on things in the production of
which he himself hears a part, but on things obtained by a double
exchange, a sale followed by a purchase-the question of Value is
fundamental. Almost every speculation respecting the economical
interests of a society thus constituted, implies some theory of
Value: the smallest error on that subject infects with
corresponding error all our other conclusions; and anything vague
or misty in our conception of it, creates confusion and
uncertainty in everything else. Happily, there is nothing in the
laws of Value which remains for the present or any future writer
to clear up; the theory of the subject is complete: the only
difficulty to be overcome is that of so stating it as to solve by
anticipation the chief perplexities which occur in applying it:
and to do this, some minuteness of exposition, and considerable
demands on the patience of the reader, are unavoidable. He will
be amply repaid, however (if a stranger to these inquiries), by
the ease and rapidity with which a thorough understanding of this
subject will enable him to fathom most of the remaining questions
of political economy. 

    2. We must begin by settling our phraseology. Adam Smith, in
a passage often quoted, has touched upon the most obvious
ambiguity of the word value; which, in one of its senses,
signifies usefulness, in another, power of purchasing; in his own
language, value in use and value in exchange. But (as Mr. De
Quincey has remarked) in illustrating this double meaning, Adam
Smith has himself fallen into another ambiguity. Things (he says)
which have the greatest value in use have often little or no
value in exchange; which is true, since that which can be
obtained without labour or sacrifice will command no price,
however useful or needful it may be. But he proceeds to add, that
things which have the greatest value in exchange, as a diamond
for example, may have little or no value in use. This is
employing the word use, not in the sense in which political
economy is concerned with it, but in that other sense in which
use is opposed to pleasure. Political economy has nothing to do
with the comparative estimation of different uses in the judgment
of a philosopher or a moralist. The use of a thing, in political
economy, means its capacity to satisfy a desire, or serve a
purpose. Diamonds have this capacity in a high degree, and unless
they had it, would not bear any price. Value in use, or as Mr. De
Quincey calls it, teleologic value, is the extreme limit of value
in exchange. The exchange value of a thing may fall short, to any
amount, of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed the
value in use, implies a contradiction; it supposes that persons
will give, to possess a thing, more than the utmost value which
they themselves put upon it as a means of gratifying their
inclinations. 
    The word Value, when used without adjunct, always means, in
political economy, value in exchange; or as it has been called by
Adam Smith and his successors, exchangeable value, a phrase which
no amount of authority that can be quoted for it can make other
than bad English. Mr. De Quincey substitutes the term Exchange
Value, which is unexceptionable. 
    Exchange value requires to be distinguished from Price. The
words Value and Price were used as synonymous by the early
political economists, and are not always discriminated even by
Ricardo. But the most accurate modern writers, to avoid the
wasteful expenditure of two good scientific terms on a single
idea, have employed Price to express the value of a thing in
relation to money; the quantity of money for which it will
exchange. By the price of a thing, therefore, we shall henceforth
understand its value in money; by the value, or exchange value of
a thing, its general power of purchasing; the command which its
possession gives over purchaseable commodities in general. 

    3. But here a fresh demand for explanation presents itself.
What is meant by command over commodities in general? The same
thing exchanges for a great quantity of some commodities, and for
a very small quantity of others. A suit of clothes exchanges for
a great quantity of bread, and for a very small quantity of
precious stones. The value of a thing in exchange for some
commodities may be rising, for others falling. A coat may
exchange for less bread this year than last, if the harvest has
been bad, but for more glass or iron, if a tax has been taken off
those commodities, or an improvement made in their manufacture.
Has the value of the coat, under these circumstances, fallen or
risen? It is impossible to say. all that can be said is, that it
has fallen in relation to one thing, and risen in respect to
another. But there is another case, in which no one would have
any hesitation in saying what sort of change had taken place in
the value of the coat: namely, if the cause in which the
disturbance of exchange values originated, was something directly
affecting the coat itself, and not the bread or the glass.
Suppose, for example, that an invention had been made in
machinery, by which broadcloth could be woven at half the former
cost. The effect of this would be to lower the value of a coat,
and if lowered by this cause, it would he lowered not in relation
to bread only or to glass only, but to all purchaseable things,
except such as happened to be affected at the very time by a
similar depressing cause. We should therefore say, that there had
been a fall in the exchange value or general purchasing power of
a coat. The idea of general exchange value originates in the
fact, that there really are causes which tend to alter the value
of a thing in exchange for things generally, that is, for all
things which are not themselves acted upon by causes of similar
tendency. 
    In considering exchange value scientifically, it is expedient
to abstract from it all causes except those which originate in
the very commodity under consideration. Those which originate in
the commodities with which we compare it, affect its value in
relation to those commodities; but those which originate in
itself, affect its value in relation to all commodities. In order
the more completely to confine our attention to these last, it is
convenient to assume that all commodities but the one in question
remain invariable in their relative values. When we are
considering the causes which raise or lower the value of corn, we
suppose that woollens, silks, cutlery, sugar, timber, &c., while
varying in their power of purchasing corn, remain constant in the
proportions in which they exchange for one another. On this
assumption, any one of them may be taken as a representative of
all the rest; since in whatever manner corn varies in value with
respect to any one commodity, it varies in the same manner and
degree with respect to every other; and the upward or downward
movement of its value estimated in some one thing, is all that
need be considered. Its money value, therefore, or price, will
represent as well as anything else its general exchange value, or
purchasing power; and from an obvious convenience, will often be
employed by us in that representative character; with the proviso
that money itself do not vary in its general purchasing power,
but that the prices of all things, other than that which we
happen to be considering, remain unaltered. 

    4. The distinction between Value and Price, as we have now
refined them, is so obvious, as scarcely to seem in need of any
illustration. But in political economy the greatest errors arise
from overlooking the most obvious truths. Simple as this
distinction is, it has consequences with which a reader
unacquainted with the subject would do well to begin early by
making himself thoroughly familiar. The following is one of the
principal. There is such a thing as a general rise of prices. All
commodities may rise in their money price. But there cannot be a
general rise of values. It is a contradiction in terms. A can
only rise in value by exchanging for a greater quantity of B and
C; in which case these must exchange for a smaller quantity of A.
All things cannot rise relatively to one another. If one-half of
the commodities in the market rise in exchange value, the very
terms imply a fall of the other half; and reciprocally, the fall
implies a rise. Things which are exchanged for one another can no
more all fall, or all rise, than a dozen runners can each outrun
all the rest, or a hundred trees all overtop one another. Simple
as this truth is, we shall presently see that it is lost sight of
in some of the most accredited doctrines both of theorists and of
what are called practical men. And as a first specimen, we may
instance the great importance attached in the imagination of most
people to a rise or fall of general prices. Because when the
price of any one commodity rises, the circumstance usually
indicates a rise of its value, people have an indistinct feeling
when all prices rise, as if all things simultaneously had risen
in value, and all the possessors had become enriched. That the
money prices of all things should rise or fall, provided they all
rise or fall equally, is in itself, and apart from existing
contracts, of no consequence. It affects nobody's wages, profits,
or rent. Every one gets more money in the one case and less in
the other; but of all that is to be bought with money they get
neither more nor less than before. It makes no other difference
than that of using more or fewer counters to reckon by. The only
thing which in this case is really altered in value is money; and
the only persons who either gain or lose are the holders of
money, or those who have to receive or to pay fixed sums of it.
There is a difference to annuitants and to creditors the one way,
and to those who are burthened with annuities, or with debts, the
contrary way. There is a disturbance, in short, of fixed money
contracts; and this is an evil, whether it takes place in the
debtor's favour or in the creditor's. But as to future
transactions there is no difference to any one. Let it therefore
be remembered (and occasions will often arise for calling it to
mind) that a general rise or a general fall of values is a
contradiction; and that a general rise or a general fall of
prices is merely tantamount to an alteration in the value of
money, and is a matter of complete indifference, save in so far
as it affects existing contracts for receiving and paying fixed
pecuniary amounts, and (it must be added) as it affects the
interests of the producers of money. 

    5. Before commencing the inquiry into the laws of value and
price, I have one further observation to make. I must give
warning, once for all, that the cases I contemplate are those in
which values and prices are determined by competition alone. In
so far only as they are thus determined, can they be reduced to
any assignable law. The buyers must be supposed as studious to
buy cheap, as the sellers to sell dear. The values and prices,
therefore, to which our conclusions apply, are mercantile values
and prices; such prices as are quoted in price-currents; prices
in the wholesale markets, in which buying as well as selling is a
matter of business; in which the buyers take pains to know, and
generally do know, the lowest price at which an article of a
given quality can he obtained; and in which, therefore, the axiom
is true, that there cannot be for the same article, of the same
quality, two prices in the same market. Our propositions will be
true in a much more qualified sense, of retail prices; the prices
paid in shops for articles of personal consumption. For such
things there often are not merely two, but many prices, in
different shops, or even in the same shop; habit and accident
having as much to do in the mater as general causes. Purchases
for private use, even by people in business, are not always made
on business principles: the feelings which come into play in the
operation of getting, and in that of spending their income, are
often extremely different. Either from indolence, or
carelessness, or because people think it fine to pay and ask no
questions, three-fourths of those who can afford it give much
higher prices than necessary for the things they consume; while
the poor often do the same from ignorance and defect of judgment,
want of time for searching and making inquiry, and not
unfrequently from coercion, open or disguised. For these reasons,
retail prices do not follow with all the regularity which might
be expected, the action of the causes which determine wholesale
prices. The influence of those causes is ultimately felt in the
retail markets, and is the real source of such variations in
retail prices as are of a general and permanent character. But
there is no regular or exact correspondence. Shoes of equally
good quality are sold in different shops at prices which differ
considerably; and the price of leather may fall without causing
the richer class of buyers to pay less for shoes. Nevertheless,
shoes do sometimes fall in price; and when they do, the cause is
always some such general circumstance as the cheapening of
leather: and when leather is cheapened, even if no difference
shows itself in shops frequented by rich people, the artizan and
the labourer generally get their shoes cheaper, and there is a
visible diminution in the contract prices at which shoes are
delivered for the supply of a workhouse or of a regiment. In all
reasoning about prices, the proviso must be understood,
"supposing all parties to take care of their own interest." In
attention to these distinctions has led to improper applications
of the abstract principles of political economy, and still
oftener to an undue discrediting of those principles, through
their being compared with a different sort of facts from those
which they contemplate, or which can fairly be expected to accord
with them. 

