The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 19

Of Money, Considered as an Imported Commodity

    1. The degree of progress which we have now made in the
theory of Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to supply what was
previously deficient in our view of the theory of Money; and
this, when completed, will in its turn enable us to conclude the
subject of Foreign Trade. 
    Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in Great
Britain, and in most other countries, a foreign commodity. Its
value and distribution must therefore be regulated, not by the
law of value which obtains in adjacent places, but by that which
is applicable to imported commodities -- the law of International
Values. 
    In the discussion into which we are now about to enter, I
shall use the terms Money and the Precious Metals
indiscriminately. This may be done without leading to any error;
it having been shown that the value of money, when it consists of
the precious metals, or of a paper currency convertible into them
on demand, is entirely governed by the value of the metals
themselves: from which it never permanently differs, except by
the expense of coinage when this is paid by the individual and
not by the state. 
    Money is brought into a country in two different ways. It is
imported (chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other
merchandize, as being an advantageous article of commerce. It is
also imported in its other character of a medium of exchange, to
pay some debt due to the country, either for goods exported or on
any other account. There are other ways in which it may be
introduced casually; these are the two in which it is received in
the ordinary course of business, and which determine its value.
The existence of these two distinct modes in which money flows
into a country, while other commodities are habitually introduced
only in the first of these modes, occasions somewhat more of
complexity and obscurity than exists in the case of other
commodities, and for this reason only is any special and minute
exposition necessary . 

    2. In so far as the precious metals are imported in the
ordinary way of commerce, their value must depend on the same
causes, and conform to the same laws, as the value of any other
foreign production. It is in this mode chiefly that gold and
silver diffuse themselves from the mining countries into all
other parts of the commercial world. They are the staple
commodities of those countries, or at least are among their great
articles of regular export; and are shipped on speculation, in
the same manner as other exportable commodities. The quantity,
therefore, which a country (say England) will give of its own
produce, for a certain quantity of bullion, will depend, if we
suppose only two countries and two commodities, upon the demand
in England for bullion, compared with the demand in the mining
country (which we will call Brazil) for what England has to give.
They must exchange in such proportions as will leave no
unsatisfied demand on either side, to alter values by its
competition. The bullion required by England must exactly pay for
the cottons or other English commodities required by Brazil. If,
however, we substitute for this simplicity the degree of
complication which really exists, the equation of international
demand must be established not between the bullion wanted in
England and the cottons or broadcloth wanted in Brazil, but
between the whole of the imports of England and the whole of her
exports. The demand in foreign countries for English products,
must be brought into equilibrium with the demand in England for
the products of foreign countries; and all foreign commodities,
billion among the rest, must be exchanged against English
products in such proportions, as will, by the effect they produce
on the demand, establish this equilibrium. 
    There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the
precious metals, which should make them an exception to the
general principles of demand. So far as they are wanted for
purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand increases with the
cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand for any other
commodity. So far as they are required for money, the demand
increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular way, the
quantity needed being always in inverse proportion to the value.
This is the only real difference, in respect to demand, between
money and other things; and for the present purpose it is a
difference altogether immaterial. 
    Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will, like
other imported commodities, be of lowest value in the countries
for whose exports there is the greatest foreign demand, and which
have themselves the least demand for foreign commodities. To
these two circumstances it is however necessary to add two
others, which produce their effect through cost of carriage. The
cost of obtaining bullion is compounded of two elements; the
goods given to purchase it, and the expense of transport: of
which last, the bullion countries will bear a part, (though an
uncertain part,) in the adjustment of international values. The
expense of transport is partly that of carrying the goods to the
bullion countries, and partly that of bringing back the bullion;
both these items are influenced by the distance from the mines;
and the former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the
goods. Countries whose exportable produce consists of the finer
manufactures, obtain bullion, as well as all other foreign
articles, caeteris paribus, at less expense than countries which
export nothing but bulky raw produce. 
    To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say -- The countries
whose exportable productions are most in demand abroad, and
contain greatest value in smallest bulk, which are nearest to the
mines, and which have least demand for foreign productions, are
those in which money will be of lowest value, or in other words,
in which prices will habitually range the highest. If we are
speaking not of the value of money, but of its cost, (that is,
the quantity of the country's labour which must be expended to
obtain it,) we must add to these four conditions of cheapness a
fifth condition, namely, "whose productive industry is the most
efficient." This last, however, does not at all affect the value
of money, estimated in commodities: it affects the general
abundance and facility with which all things, money and
commodities together, can be obtained. 
    Although, therefore, Mr Senior is right in pointing out the
great efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why the
precious metals are obtained at less cost by England than by most
other countries, I cannot admit that it at all accounts for their
being of less value; for their going less far in the purchase of
commodities. This, in so far as it is a fact, and not an
illusion, must be occasioned by the great demand in foreign
countries for the staple commodities of England, and the
generally unbulky character of those commodities, compared with
the corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool, hides, tallow, hemp, flax,
tobacco, raw cotton, &c., which form the exports of other
commercial countries. These two causes will account for a
somewhat higher range of general prices in England than
elsewhere, notwithstanding the counteracting influence of her own
great demand for foreign commodities. I am, however, strongly of
opinion that the high prices of commodities, and low purchasing
power of money in England, are more apparent than real. Food,
indeed, is somewhat dearer; and food composes so large a portion
of the expenditure when the income is small and the family large,
that to such families England is a dear country. Services, also,
of most descriptions, are dearer than in the other countries of
Europe, from the less costly mode of living of the poorer classes
on the Continent. But manufactured commodities (except most of
those in which good taste is required) are decidedly cheaper; or
would be so, if buyers would be content with the same quality of
material and of workmanship. What is called the dearness of
living in England, is mainly an affair not of necessity but of
foolish custom; it being thought imperative by all classes in
England above the condition of a day-labourer, that the things
they consume should either be of the same quality with those used
by much richer people, or at least should be as nearly as
possible undistinguishable from them in outward appearance. 

    3. From the preceding considerations, it appears that those
are greatly in error who contend that the value of money, in
countries where it is an imported commodity, must be entirely
regulated by its value in the countries which produce it; and
cannot be raised or lowered in any permanent manner unless some
change has taken place in the cost of production at the mines. On
the contrary, any circumstance which disturbs the equation of
international demand with respect to a particular country, not
only may, but must, affect the value of money in that country --
its value at the mines remaining the same. The opening of a new
branch of export trade from England; an increase in the foreign
demand for English products, either by the natural course of
events, or by the abrogation of duties; a check to the demand in
England for foreign commodities, by the laying on of import
duties in England or of export duties elsewhere; these and all
other events of similar tendency, would make the imports of
England (bullion and other things taken together) no longer an
equivalent for the exports; and the countries which take her
exports would be obliged to offer their commodities, and bullion
among the rest, on cheaper terms, in order to re-establish the
equation of demand: and thus England would obtain money cheaper,
and would acquire a generally higher range of prices. Incidents
the reverse of these would produce effects the reverse -- would
reduce prices; or, in other words, raise the value of the
precious metals. It must be observed, however, that money would
be thus raised in value only with respect to home commodities: in
relation to all imported articles it would remain as before,
since their values would be affected in the same way and in the
same degree with its own. A country which, from any of the causes
mentioned, gets money cheaper, obtains all its other imports
cheaper likewise. 
    It is by no means necessary that the increased demand for
English commodities: which enables England to supply herself with
bullion at a cheaper rate, should be a demand in the mining
countries. England might export nothing whatever to those
countries, and yet might be the country which obtained bullion
from them on the lowest terms, provided there were a sufficient
intensity of demand in other foreign countries for English goods,
which would be paid for circuitously, with gold and silver from
the mining countries. The whole of its exports are what a country
exchanges against the whole of its imports, and not its exports
and imports to and from any one country; and the general foreign
demand for its productions will determine what equivalent it must
give for imported goods, in order to establish an equilibrium
between its sales and purchases generally; without regard to the
maintenance of a similar equilibrium between it and any country
singly. 

