The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 23

Of the Rate of Interest


    1. The present seems the most proper place for discussing the
circumstances which determine the rate of interest. The interest
of loans, being really a question of exchange value, falls
naturally into the present division of our subject: and the two
topics of Currency and Loans, though in themselves distinct, are
so intimately blended in the phenomena of what is called the
money market, that it is impossible to understand the one without
the other, and in many minds the two subjects are mixed up in the
most inextricable confusion. 
    In the preceding Book(1*) we defined the relation in which
interest stands to profit. We found that the gross profit of
capital might be distinguished into three parts, which are
respectively the remuneration for risk, for trouble, and for the
capital itself, and may be termed insurance, wages of
superintendence, and interest. After making compensation for
risk, that is, after covering the average losses to which capital
is exposed either by the general circumstances of society or by
the hazards of the particular employment, there remains a
surplus, which partly goes to repay the owner of the capital for
his abstinence, and partly the employer of it for his time and
trouble. How much goes to the one and how much to the other, is
shown by the amount of the remuneration which, when the two
functions are separated, the owner of capital can obtain from the
employer for its use. This is evidently a question of demand and
supply. Nor have demand and supply any different meaning or
effect in this case from what they have in all others. The rate
of interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with
the supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as some
people are desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall be
willing to lend. If there is more offered than demanded, interest
will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it will rise; and in
both cases, to the point at which the equation of supply and
demand is re-established. 
    Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more
incessantly than any other demand or supply whatsoever. The
fluctuations in other things depend on a limited number of
influencing circumstances; but the desire to borrow, and the
willingness to lend, are more or less influenced by every
circumstance which affects the state or prospects of industry or
commerce, either generally or in any of their branches. The rate
of interest, therefore, on good security, which alone we have
here to consider (for interest in which considerations of risk
bear a part may swell to any amount) is seldom, in the great
centres of money transactions, precisely the same for two days
together; as is shown by the never-ceasing variations in the
quoted prices of the funds and other negotiable securities.
Nevertheless, there must be, as in other cases of value, some
rate which (in the language of Adam Smith and Ricardo) may be
called the natural rate; some rate about which the market rate
oscillates, and to which it always tends to return. This rate
partly depends on the amount of accumulation going on in the
hands of persons who cannot themselves attend to the employment
of their savings, and partly on the comparative taste existing in
the community for the active pursuits of industry, or for the
leisure, ease, and independence of an annuitant. 

    2. To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose commerce
to be in a quiescent condition, no employment being unusually
prosperous, and none particularly distressed. In these
circumstances, the more thriving producers and traders have their
capital fully employed, and many are able to transact business to
a considerably greater extent than they have capital for. These
are naturally borrowers: and the amount which they desire to
borrow, and can obtain credit for, constitutes the demand for
loans on account of productive employment. To these must be added
the loans required by Government, and by landowners, or other
unproductive consumers who have good security to give. This
constitutes the mass of loans for which there is an habitual
demand. 
    Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands of
persons disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally in
business, a mass of capital equal to, and even exceeding, this
demand. In that case there would be an habitual excess of
competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of interest
would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit. Interest would
be forced down to the point which would either tempt borrowers to
take a greater amount of loans than they had a reasonable
expectation of being able to employ in their business, or would
so discourage a portion of the lenders, as to make them either
forbear to accumulate, or endeavour to increase their income by
engaging in business on their own account, and incurring the
risks, if not the labours, of industrial employment. 
    On the other hand, the capital owned by persons who prefer
lending it at interest, or whose avocations prevent them from
personally superintending its employment, may be short of the
habitual demand for loans. It may be in great part absorbed by
the investments afforded by the public debt and by mortgages, and
the remainder may not be sufficient to supply the wants of
commerce. If so, the rate of interest will be raised so high as
in some way to re-establish the equilibrium. When there is only a
small difference between interest and profit, many borrowers may
no longer be willing to increase their responsibilities and
involve their credit for so small a remuneration: or some who
would otherwise have engaged in business, may prefer leisure, and
become lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the
inducement of high interest and easy investment for their
capital, may retire from business earlier, and with smaller
fortunes, than they otherwise would have done. Or, lastly, there
is another process by which, in England and other commercial
countries, a large portion of the requisite supply of loans is
obtained. Instead of its being afforded by persons not in
business, the affording it may itself become a business. A
portion of the capital employed in trade may be supplied by a
class of professional money lenders. These money lenders,
however, must have more than a mere interest; they must have the
ordinary rate of profit on their capital, risk and all other
circumstances being allowed for. But it can never answer to any
one who borrows for the purposes of his business, to pay a full
profit for capital from which he will only derive a full profit:
and money-lending, as an employment, for the regular supply of
trade, cannot, therefore, be carried on except by persons who, in
addition to their own capital, can lend their credit, or, in
other words, the capital of other people: that is, bankers, and
persons (such as bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since
they receive money in deposit. A bank which lends its notes,
lends capital which it borrows from the community, and for which
it pays no interest. A bank of deposit lends capital which it
collects from the community in small parcels; sometimes without
paying any interest, as is the case with the London private
bankers; and if, like the Scotch, the joint stock, and most of
the country banks, it does pay interest, it still pays much less
than it receives; for the depositors, who in any other way could
mostly obtain for such small balances no interest worth taking
any trouble for, are glad to receive even a little. Having this
subsidiary resource, bankers are enabled to obtain, by lending at
interest, the ordinary rate of profit on their own capital. In
any other manner, money-lending could not be carried on as a
regular mode of business, except upon terms on which none would
consent to borrow but persons either counting on extraordinary
profits, or in urgent need: unproductive consumers who have
exceeded their means, or merchants in fear of bankruptcy. The
disposable capital deposited in banks; that represented by bank
notes; the capital of bankers themselves, and that which their
credit in any way in which they use it, enables them to dispose
of; these, together with the funds belonging to those who, either
from necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their
property, constitute the general loan fund of the country: and
the amount of this aggregate fund, when set against the habitual
demands of producers and dealers, and those of the Government and
of unproductive consumers, determines the permanent or average
rate of interest; which must always be such as to adjust these
two amounts to one another.(2*) But while the whole of this mass
of lent capital takes effect upon the permanent rate of interest,
the fluctuations depend almost entirely upon the portion which is
in the hands of bankers; for it is that portion almost
exclusively, which, being lent for short times only, is
continually in the market seeking an investment. The capital of
those who live on the interest of their own fortunes, has
generally sought and found some fixed investment, such as the
public funds, mortgages, or the bonds of public companies, which
investment, except under peculiar temptations or necessities, is
not changed. 

    3. Fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from variations
either in the demand for loans; or in the supply. The supply is
liable to variation, though less so than the demand. The
willingness to lend is greater than usual at the commencement of
a period of speculation, and much less than usual during the
revulsion which follows. In speculative times, money-lenders as
well as other people are inclined to extend their business by
stretching their credit; they lend more than usual (just as other
classes of dealers and producers employ more than usual) of
capital which does not belong to them. Accordingly, these are the
times when the rate of interest is low; though for this too (as
we shall hereafter see) there are other causes. During the
revulsion, on the contrary, interest always rises inordinately,
because, while there is a most pressing need on the part of many
persons to borrow, there is a general disinclination to lend.
This disinclination, when at its extreme point, is called a
panic. It occurs when a succession of unexpected failures has
created in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the
non-mercantile public, a general distrust in each other's
solvency; disposing every one not only to refuse fresh credit,
except on very onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all
credit which he has already given. Deposits are withdrawn from
banks; notes are returned on the issuers in exchange for specie;
bankers raise their rate of discount, and withhold their
customary advances; merchants refuse to renew mercantile bills.
At such times the most calamitous consequences were formerly
experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent more than a
certain limited rate of interest from being given or taken.
Persons who could not borrow at five per cent, had to pay, not
six or seven, but ten or fifteen per cent, to compensate the
lender for risking the penalties of the law: or had to sell
securities or goods for ready money at a still greater sacrifice.

    In the intervals between commercial crises, there is usually
a tendency in the rate of interest to a progressive decline, from
the gradual process of accumulation : which process, in the great
commercial countries, is sufficiently rapid to account for the
almost periodical recurrence of these fits of speculation; since,
when a few years have elapsed without a crisis, and no new and
tempting channel for investment has been opened in the meantime,
there is always found to have occurred in those few years so
large an increase of capital seeking investment, as to have
lowered considerably the rate of interest, whether indicated by
the prices of securities or by the rate of discount on bills; and
this diminution of interest tempts the possessor to incur hazards
in hopes of a more considerable return. 
    The rate of interest is, at times, affected more or less
permanently by circumstances, though not of frequent, yet of
occasional occurrence, which tend to alter the proportion between
the class of interest-receiving and that of profit-receiving
capitalists. Two causes of this description, operating in
contrary ways, have manifested themselves of late years, and are
now producing considerable effects in England. One is, the gold
discoveries. The masses of the precious metals which are
constantly arriving from the gold countries, are, it may safely
be said, wholly added to the funds that supply the loan market.
So great an additional capital, not divided between the two
classes of capitalists, but aggregated bodily to the capital of
the interest-receiving class, disturbs the pre-existing ratio
between the two, and tends to depress interest relatively to
profit. Another circumstance of still more recent date, but
tending to the contrary effect, is the legalization of
joint-stock associations with limited liability. The shareholders
in these associations, now so rapidly multiplying, are drawn
almost exclusively from the lending class; from those who either
left their disposable funds in deposit, to be lent out by
bankers, or invested them in public or private securities, and
received the interest. To the extent of their shares in any of
these companies (with the single exception of banking companies)
they have become traders on their own capital; they have ceased
to be lenders, and have even, in most cases, passed over to the
class of borrowers. Their subscriptions have been abstracted from
the funds which feed the loan market, and they themselves have
become competitors for a share of the remainder of those funds:
of all which, the natural effect is a rise of interest. And it
would not be surprising if, for a considerable time to come, the
ordinary rate of interest in England should bear a higher
proportion to the common rate of mercantile profit, than it has
borne at any time since the influx of new gold set in.(3*)
    The demand for loans varies much more largely than the
supply, and embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations. A
time of war, for example, is a period of unusual drafts on the
loan market. The Government, at such times, generally incurs new
loans, and as these usually succeed each other rapidly as long as
the war lasts, the general rate of interest is kept higher in war
than in peace, without reference to the rate of profit, and
productive industry is stinted of its usual supplies. During part
of the last war with France, the Government could not borrow
under six per cent, and of course all other borrowers had to pay
at least as much. Nor does the influence of these loans
altogether cease when the Government ceases to contract others;
for those already contracted continue to afford an investment for
a greatly increased amount of the disposable capital of the
country, which if the national debt were paid off, would be added
to the mass of capital seeking investment, and (independently of
temporary disturbance) could not but, to some extent, permanently
lower the rate of interest. 
    The same effect on interest which is produced by Government
loans for war expenditure, is produced by the sudden opening of
any new and generally attractive mode of permanent investment.
The only instance of the kind in recent history on a scale
comparable to that of the war loans, is the absorption of capital
in the construction of railways. This capital must have been
principally drawn from the deposits in banks, or from savings
which would have gone into deposit, and which were destined to be
ultimately employed in buying securities from persons who would
have employed the purchase money in discounts or other loans at
interest: in either case, it was a draft on the general loan
fund. It is, in fact, evident, that unless savings were made
expressly to be employed in railway adventure, the amount thus
employed must have been derived either from the actual capital of
persons in business, or from capital which would have been lent
to persons in business. In the first case, the subtraction, by
crippling their means, obliges them to be larger borrowers; in
the second, it leaves less for them to borrow; in either case it
equally tends to raise the rate of interest. 

    4. I have, thus far, considered loans, and the rate of
interest, as a matter which concerns capital in general, in
direct opposition to the popular notion, according to which it
only concerns money. In loans, as in all other money
transactions, I have regarded the money which passes, only as the
medium, and commodities as the thing really transferred -- the
real subject of the transaction. And this is, in the main,
correct: because the purpose for which, in the ordinary course of
affairs, money is borrowed, is to acquire a purchasing power over
commodities. In an industrious and commercial country, the
ulterior intention commonly is, to employ the commodities as
capital: but even in the case of loans for unproductive
consumption, as those of spendthrifts, or of the Government, the
amount borrowed is taken from a previous accumulation, which
would otherwise have been lent to carry on productive industry;
it is, therefore, so much subtracted from what may correctly be
called the amount of loanable capital. 
    There is, however, a not unfrequent case, in which the
purpose of the borrower is different from what I have here
supposed. He may borrow money, neither to employ it as capital
nor to spend it unproductively, but to pay a previous debt. In
this case, what he wants is not purchasing power, but legal
tender, or something which a creditor will accept as equivalent
to it. His need is specifically for money, not for commodities or
capital. It is the demand arising from this cause, which produces
almost all the great and sudden variations of the rate of
interest. Such a demand forms one of the earliest features of a
commercial crisis. At such a period, many persons in business who
have contracted engagements, have been prevented by a change of
circumstances from obtaining in time the means on which they
calculated for fulfilling them. These means they must obtain at
any sacrifice, or submit to bankruptcy; and what they must have
is money. Other capital, however much of it they may possess,
cannot answer the purpose unless money can first be obtained for
it; while, on the contrary, without any increase of the capital
of the country, a mere increase of circulating instruments of
credit (be they of as little worth for any other purpose as the
box of one pound notes discovered in the vaults of the Bank of
England during the panic of 1825) will effectually serve their
turn if only they are allowed to make use of it. An increased
issue of notes, in the form of loans, is all that is required to
satisfy the demand, and put an end to the accompanying panic. But
although, in this case, it is not capital, or purchasing power,
that the borrower needs, but money as money, it is not only money
that is transferred to him. The money carries its purchasing
power, with it wherever it goes; and money thrown into the loan
market really does, through its purchasing power, turn over an
increased portion of the capital of the country into the
direction of loans. Though money alone was wanted, capital
passes; and it may still be said with truth that it is by an
addition to loanable capital that the rise of the rate of
interest is met and corrected. 
    Independently of this, however, there is a real relation,
which it is indispensable to recognise, between loans and money.
Loanable capital is all of it in the form of money. Capital
destined directly for production exists in many forms; but
capital destined for lending exists normally in that form alone.
Owing to this circumstance, we should naturally expect that among
the causes which affect more or less the rate of interest, would
be found not only causes which act through capital, but some
causes which act, directly at least, only through money. 
    The rate of interest bears no necessary relation to the
quantity or value of the money in circulation. The permanent
amount of the circulating medium, whether great or small, affects
only prices; not the rate of interest. A depreciation of the
currency, when it has become an accomplished fact, affects the
rate of interest in no manner whatever. It diminishes indeed the
power of money to buy commodities, but not the power of money to
buy money. If a hundred pounds will buy a perpetual annuity of
four pounds a year, a depreciation which makes the hundred pounds
worth only half as much as before, has precisely the same effect
on the four pounds, and cannot therefore alter the relation
between the two. The greater or smaller number of counters which
must be used to express a given amount of real wealth, makes no
difference in the position or interests of lenders or borrowers,
and therefore makes no difference in the demand and supply of
loans. There is the same amount of real capital lent and
borrowed; and if the capital in the hands of lenders is
represented by a greater number of pounds sterling, the same
greater number of pounds sterling will, in consequence of the
rise of prices, be now required for the purposes to which the
borrowers intend to apply them. 
    But though the greater or less quantity of money makes in
itself no difference in the rate of interest, a change from a
less quantity to a greater, or from a greater to a less, may and
does make a difference in it.     Suppose money to be in process
of depreciation by means of an inconvertible currency, issued by
a government in payment of its expenses. This fact will in no way
diminish the demand for real capital on loan; but it will
diminish the real capital loanable, because, this existing only
in the form of money, the increase of quantity depreciates it.
Estimated in capital, the amount offered is less, while the
amount required is the same as before. Estimated in currency, the
amount offered is only the same as before, while the mount
required, owing to the rise of prices, is greater. Either way,
the rate of interest must rise. So that in this case increase of
currency really affects the rate of interest, but in the contrary
way to that which is generally supposed; by raising, not by
lowering it. 
    The reverse will happen as the effect of calling in, or
diminishing in quantity, a depreciated currency. The money in the
hands of lenders, in common with all other money, will be
enhanced in value, that is, there vill be a greater amount of
real capital seeking borrowers; while the real capital wanted by
borrowers will be only the same as before, and the money mount
less: the rate of interest, therefore, will tend to fall. 
    We thus see that depreciation, merely as such, while in
process of taking place, tends to raise the rate of interest: and
the expectation of further depreciation adds to this effect;
because lenders who expect that their interest will be paid and
the principal perhaps redeemed, in a less valuable currency than
they lent, of course require a rate of interest sufficient to
cover this contingent loss. 
    But this effect is more than counteracted by a contrary one,
when the additional money is thrown into circulation not by
purchases but by loans. In England, and in most other commercial
countries, the paper currency in common use, being a currency
provided by bankers, is all issued in the way of loans, except
the part employed in the purchase of gold and silver. The same
operation, therefore, which adds to the currency also adds to the
loans: the whole increase of currency in the first instance
swells the loan market. Considered as an addition to loans it
tends to lower interest, more than in its character of
depreciation it tends to raise it; for the former effect depends
on the ratio which the new money bears to the money lent, while
the latter depends on its ratio to all the money in circulation.
An increase, therefore, of currency issued by banks, tends, while
the process continues, to bring down or to keep down the rate of
interest. A similar effect is produced by the increase of money
arising from the gold discoveries; almost the whole of which, as
already noticed, is, when brought to Europe, added to the
deposits in banks, and consequently to the mount of loans; and
when drawn out and invested in securities, liberates an
equivalent amount of other loanable capital. The newly-arrived
gold can only get itself invested, in any given state of
business, by lowering the rate of interest; and as long as the
influx continues, it cannot fail to keep interest lower than, all
other circumstances being supposed the same, would otherwise have
been the case. 
    As the introduction of additional gold and silver, which goes
into the loan market, tends to keep down the rate of interest, so
any considerable abstraction of them from the country invariably
raises it; even when occurring in the course of trade, as in
paying for the extra importations caused by a bad harvest, or for
the high-priced cotton which, under the influence of the American
civil war, was imported from so many parts of the world. The
money required for these payments is taken in the first instance
from the deposits in the hands of bankers, and to that extent
starves the fund that supplies the loan market. 
    The rate of interest, then, depends essentially and
permanently on the comparative amount of real capital offered and
demanded in the way of loan; but is subject to temporary
disturbances of various sorts, from increase and diminution of
the circulating medium; which derangements are somewhat
intricate, and sometimes in direct opposition to first
appearances. All these distinctions are veiled over and
confounded, by the unfortunate misapplication of language which
designates the rate of interest by a phrase ("the value of
money") which properly expresses the purchasing power of the
circulating medium. The public, even mercantile, habitually
fancies that ease in the money market, that is, facility of
borrowing at low interest, is proportional to the quantity of
money in circulation. Not only, therefore, are bank notes
supposed to produce effects as currency, which they only produce
as loans, but attention is habitually diverted from effects
similar in kind and much greater in degree, when produced by an
action on loans which does not happen to be accompanied by any
action on the currency. 
    For example, in considering the effect produced by the
proceedings of banks in encouraging the excesses of speculation,
an immense effect is usually attributed to their issues of notes,
but until of late hardly any attention was paid to the management
of their deposits; though nothing is more certain than that their
imprudent extensions of credit take place more frequently by
means of their deposits than of their issues. "There is no
doubt," says Mr. Tooke,(4*) "that banks, whether private or joint
stock, may, if imprudently conducted, minister to an undue
extension of credit for the purpose of speculations, whether in
commodities, or in overtrading in exports or imports, or in
building or mining operations, and that they have so ministered
not unfrequently, and in some cases to an extent ruinous to
themselves, and without ultimate benefit to the parties to whose
views their resources were made subservient." But, "supposing all
the deposits received by a banker to be in coin, is he not, just
as much as the issuing banker, exposed to the importunity of
customers, whom it may be impolitic to refuse, for loans or
discounts, or to be tempted by a high interest? and may he not be
induced to encroach so much upon his deposits as to leave him,
under not improbable circumstances, unable to meet the demands of
his depositors? In what respect, indeed, would the case of a
banker in a perfectly metallic circulation, differ from that of a
London banker at the present day? He is not a creator of money,
he cannot avail himself of his privilege as an issuer in aid of
his other business, and yet there have been lamentable instances
of London bankers issuing money in excess."
    In the discussions, too, which have been for so many years
carried on respecting the operations of the Bank of England, and
the effects produced by those operations on the state of credit,
though for nearly half a century there never has been a
commercial crisis which the Bank has not been strenuously accused
either of producing or of aggravating, it has been almost
universally assumed that the influence of its acts was felt only
through the amount of its notes in circulation, and that if it
could be prevented from exercising any discretion as to that one
feature in its position, it would no longer have any power liable
to abuse. This at least is an error which, after the experience
of the year 1847, we may hope has been committed for the last
time. During that year the hands of the bank were absolutely
tied, in its character of a bank of issue; but through its
operations as a bank of deposit it exercised as great an
influence, or apparent influence, on the rate of interest and the
state of credit, as at any former period; it was exposed to as
vehement accusations of abusing that influence; and a crisis
occurred, such as few that preceded it had equalled, and none
perhaps surpassed, in intensity. 

    5. Before quitting the general subject of this chapter, I
will make the obvious remark, that the rate of interest
determines the value and price of all those saleable articles
which are desired and bought, not for themselves, but for the
income which they are capable of yielding. The public funds,
shares in joint-stock companies, and all descriptions of
securities, are at a high price in proportion as the rate of
interest is low. They are sold at the price which will give the
market rate of interest on the purchase money, with allowance for
all differences in the risk incurred, or in any circumstance of
convenience. Exchequer bills, for example, usually sell at a
higher price than consols, proportionally to the interest which
they yield; because, though the security is the same, yet the
former being annually paid off at par unless renewed by the
holder, the purchaser (unless obliged to sell in a moment of
general emergency), is in no danger of losing anything by the
resale, except the premium he may have paid.
    The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of
income, depends in like manner on the rate of interest. Land
usually sells at a higher price, in proportion to the income
afforded by it, than the public funds, not only because it is
thought, even in this country, to be somewhat more secure, but
because ideas of power and dirty are associated with its
possession. But these differences are constant, or nearly so; and
in the variations of price, land follows, caeteris paribus, the
permanent (though of course not the daily) variations of the rate
of interest. When interest is low, land will naturally be dear;
when interest is high, land will be cheap. The last long war
presented a striking exception to this rule, since the price of
land as well as the rate of interest was then remarkably high.
For this, however, there was a special cause. The continuance of
a very high average price of corn for many years, had raised the
rent of land even more than in proportion to the rise of interest
and fall of the selling price of fixed incomes. Had it not been
for this accident, chiefly dependent on the seasons, land must
have sustained as great a depreciation in value as the public
funds: which it probably would do, were a similar war to break
out hereafter; to the signal disappointment of those landlords
and farmers who, generalizing from the casual circumstances of a
remarkable period, so long persuaded themselves that a state of
war was peculiarly advantageous, and a state of peace
disadvantageous, to what they chose to call the interests of
agriculture.

NOTES:

1. Supra, book ii, ch. xv. section 1.

2. I do not include in the general loan fund of the country the
capitals, large as they sometimes are, which are habitually
employed in speculatively buying and selling the public funds and
other securities. It is true that all who buy securities add, for
the time, to the general amount of money on loan, and lower pro
tanto the rate of interest. But as the persons I speak of buy
only to sell again at a higher price, they are alternately in the
position of lenders and of borrowers: their operations raise the
rate of interest at one time, exactly as much as they lower it at
another. Like all persons who buy and sell on speculation, their
function is to equalize, not to raise or lower, the value of the
commodity. When they speculate prudently, they temper the
fluctuations of price; when imprudently, they often aggravate
them. 

3. To the cause of augmentation in the rate of interest,
mentioned in the text, must be added another, forcibly insisted
on by the author of an able article in the Edinburgh Review for
January, 1865; the increased and increasing willingness to send
capital abroad for investment. Owing to the vastly augmented
facilities of access to foreign countries, and the abundant
information incessantly received from them, foreign investments
have ceased to inspire the terror that belongs to the unknown;
capital flows, without misgiving, to any place which affords an
expectation of high profit; and the loan market of the whole
commercial world is rapidly becoming one. The rate of interest,
therefore, in the part of the world out of which capital most
freely flows, cannot any longer remain so much inferior to the
rate elsewhere, as it has hitherto been. 

4. Inquiry into the Currency Principle, ch. xiv.

