The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 22

Influence of the Currency on the Exchanges and on Foreign Trade

    1. In our inquiry into the laws of international trade, we
commenced with the principles which determine international
exchanges and international values on the hypothesis of barter.
We next showed that the introduction of money as a medium of
exchange, makes no difference in the laws of exchanges and of
values between country and country, no more than between
individual and individual: since the precious metals, under the
influence of those same laws, distribute themselves in such
proportions among the different countries of the world, as to
allow the very same exchanges to go on, and at the same values,
as would be the case under a system of barter. We lastly
considered how the value of money itself is affected, by those
alterations in the state of trade which arise from alterations
either in the demand and supply of commodities, or in their cost
of production. It remains to consider the alterations in the
state of trade which originate not in commodities but in money. 
    Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they are
not so likely to vary as other things, in their cost of
production. The demand for them in foreign countries may also
vary. It may increase, by augmented employment of the metals for
purposes of art and ornament, or because the increase of
production and of transactions has created a greater amount of
business to be done by the circulating medium. It may diminish,
for the opposite reasons; or from the extension of the
economizing expedients by which the use of metallic money is
partially dispensed with. These changes act upon the trade
between other countries and the mining countries, and upon the
value of the precious metals, according to the general laws of
the value of imported commodities: which have been set forth in
the previous chapters with sufficient fulness. 
    What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is not
those circumstances affecting money, which alter the permanent
conditions of its value; but the effects produced on
international trade by casual or temporary variations in the
value of money, which have no connexion with any causes affecting
its permanent value. This is a subject of importance, on account
of its bearing upon the practical problem which has excited so
much discussion for sixty years past, the regulation of the
currency. 

    2. Let us suppose in any country a circulating medium purely
metallic, and a sudden casual increase made to it; for example,
by bringing into circulation hoards of treasure, which had been
concealed in a previous period of foreign invasion or internal
disorder. The natural effect would be a rise of prices. This
would check exports, and encourage imports; the imports would
exceed the exports, the exchanges would become unfavourable, and
the newly acquired stock of money would diffuse itself over all
countries with which the supposed country carried on trade, and
from them, progressively, through all parts of the commercial
world. The money which thus overflowed would spread itself to an
equal depth over all commercial countries. For it would go on
flowing until the exports and imports again balanced one another:
and this (as no change is supposed in the permanent circumstances
of international demand) could only be, when the money had
diffused itself so equally that prices had risen in the same
ratio in all countries, so that the alteration of price would be
for all practical purposes ineffective, and the exports and
imports, though at a higher money valuation, would be exactly the
same as they were originally. This diminished value of money
throughout the world, (at least if the diminution was
considerable) would cause a suspension, or at least a diminution,
of the annual supply from the mines: since the metal would no
longer command a value equivalent to its highest cost of
production. The annual waste would, therefore, not be fully made
up, and the usual causes of destruction would gradually reduce
the aggregate quantity of the precious metals to its former
amount; after which their production would recommence on its
former scale. The discovery of the treasure would thus produce
only temporary effects; namely, a brief disturbance of
international trade until the treasure had disseminated itself
through the world, and then a temporary depression in the value
of the metal, below that which corresponds to the cost of
producing or of obtaining it; which depression would gradually be
corrected, by a temporarily diminished production in the
producing countries, and importation in the importing countries. 
    The same effects which would thus arise from the discovery of
a treasure, accompany the process by which bank notes, or any of
the other substitutes for money, take the place of the precious
metals. Suppose that England possessed a currency wholly
metallic, of twenty millions sterling, and that suddenly twenty
millions of bank notes were sent into circulation. If these were
issued by bankers, they would be employed in loans, or in the
purchase of securities, and would therefore create a sudden fall
in the rate of interest, which would probably send a great part
of the twenty millions of gold out of the country as capital, to
seek a higher rate of interest elsewhere, before there had been
time for any action on prices. But we will suppose that the notes
are not issued by bankers, or money-lenders of any kind, but by
manufacturers, in the payment of wages and purchase of materials,
or by the government in its ordinary expenses, so that the whole
amount would be rapidly carried into the markets for commodities.
The following would be the natural order of consequences. All
prices would rise greatly. Exportation would almost cease;
importation would be prodigiously stimulated. A great balance of
payments would become due; the exchanges would turn against
England, to the full extent of the cost of exporting money; and
the surplus coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the
various countries of the world, in the order of their proximity,
geographically and commercially, to England. The efflux would
continue until the currencies of all countries had come to a
level; by which I do not mean, until money became of the same
value everywhere, but until the differences were only those which
existed before, and which corresponded to permanent differences
in the cost of obtaining it. When the rise of prices had extended
itself in an equal degree to all countries, exports and imports
would everywhere revert to what they were at first, would balance
one another, and the exchanges would return to par. If such a sum
of money as twenty millions, when spread over the whole surface
of the commercial world, were sufficient to raise the general
level in a perceptible degree, the effect would be of no long
duration. No alteration having occurred in the general conditions
under which the metals were procured, either in the world at
large or in any part of it, the reduced value would no longer be
remunerating, and the supply from the mines would cease partially
or wholly, until the twenty millions were absorbed;(1*) after
which absorption, the currencies of all countries would be, in
quantity and in value, nearly at their original level. I say
nearly, for in strict accuracy there would be a slight
difference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the precious
metals would now be required, there being in the world twenty
millions less of metallic money undergoing waste. The equilibrium
of payments, consequently, between the mining countries and the
rest of the world, would thenceforth require that the mining
countries should either export rather more of something else, or
import rather less of foreign commodities; which implies a
somewhat lower range of prices than previously in the mining
countries, and a somewhat higher in all others; a scantier
currency in the former, and rather fuller currencies in the
latter. This effect, which would be too trifling to require
notice except for the illustration of a principle, is the only
permanent change which would be produced on international trade,
or on the value or quantity of the currency of any country. 
    Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced.
Twenty millions which formerly existed in the unproductive form
of metallic money, have been converted into what is, or is
capable of becoming, productive capital. This gain is at first
made by England at the expense of other countries, who have taken
her superfluity of this costly and unproductive article off her
hands, giving for it an equivalent value in other commodities. By
degree the loss is made up to those countries by diminished
influx from the mines, and finally the world has gained a virtual
addition of twenty millions to its productive resources. Adam
Smith's illustration, though so well known, deserves for its
extreme aptness to be once more repeated. He compares the
substitution of paper in the room of the precious metals, to the
construction of a highway through the air, by which the ground
now occupied by roads would become available for agriculture. As
in that case a portion of the soil, so in this a part of the
accumulated wealth of the country, would be relieved from a
function in which it was only employed in rendering other soils
and capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to
production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally well
discharged by a medium which costs nothing. 
    The value saved to the community by thus dispensing with
metallic money, is a clear gain to those who provide the
substitute. They have the use of twenty millions of circulating
medium which have cost them only the expense of an engraver's
plate. If they employ this accession to their fortunes as
productive capital, the produce of the country is increased, and
the community benefited, as much as by any other capital of equal
amount. Whether it is so employed or not, depends, in some
degree, upon the mode of issuing it. If issued by the government,
and employed in paying off debt, it would probably become
productive capital. The government, however, may prefer employing
this extraordinary resource in its ordinary expenses; may
squander it uselessly, or make it a mere temporary substitute for
taxation to an equivalent amount; in which last case the amount
is saved by the taxpayers at large, who either add it to their
capital or spend it as income. When paper currency is supplied,
as in our own country, by bankers and banking companies, the
amount is almost wholly turned into productive capital: for the
issuers, being at all times liable to be called upon to refund
the value, are under the strongest inducements not to squander
it, and the only cases in which it is not forthcoming are cases
of fraud or mismanagement. A banker's profession being that of a
moneylender, his issue of notes is a simple extension of his
ordinary occupation. He lends the amount to farmers,
manufacturers, or dealers, who employ it in their several
businesses. So employed, it yields, like any other capital, wages
of labour and profits of stock. The profit is shared between the
banker, who receives interest, and a succession of borrowers,
mostly for short periods, who after paying the interest, gain a
profit in addition, or a convenience equivalent to profit. The
capital itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and when
replaced by the sale of the produce, becomes wages again; thus
affording a perpetual fund, of the value of twenty millions, for
the maintenance of productive labour, and increasing the annual
produce of the country by all that can be produced through the
means of a capital of that value. To this gain must be added a
further saving to the country, of the annual supply of the
precious metals necessary for repairing the wear and tear, and
other waste, of a metallic currency. 
    The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious
metals, should always be carried as far as is consistent with
safety; no greater amount of metallic currency being retained
than is necessary to maintain, both in fact and in public belief,
the convertibility of the paper. A country with the extensive
commercial relations of England is liable to be suddenly called
upon for large foreign payments, sometimes in loans, or other
investments of capital abroad, sometimes as the price of some
unusual importation of goods, the most frequent case being that
of large importations of food consequent on a bad harvest. To
meet such demands it is necessary that there should be, either in
circulation or in the coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a
very considerable amount, and that this, when drawn out by any
emergency, should be allowed to return after the emergency is
past. But since gold wanted for exportation is almost invariably
drawn from the reserves of the banks, and is never likely to be
taken directly from the circulation while the banks remain
solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained from retaining
partially a metallic currency for daily purposes is, that the
banks may occasionally replenish their reserves from it. 

    3. When metallic money had been entirely superseded and
expelled from circulation, by the substitution of an equal amount
of bank notes, any attempt to keep a still further quantity of
paper in circulation must, if the notes are convertible, be a
complete failure. The new issue would again set in motion the
same train of consequences by which the gold coin had already
been expelled. The metals would, as before, be required for
exportation, and would be for that purpose demanded from the
banks, to the full extent of the superfluous notes; which thus
could not possibly be retained in circulation. If, indeed, the
notes were inconvertible, there would be no such obstacle to the
increase of their quantity. An inconvertible paper acts in the
same way as a convertible, while there remains any coin for it to
supersede: the difference begins to manifest itself when all the
coin is driven from circulation (except what may be retained for
the convenience of small change), and the issues still go on
increasing. When the paper begins to exceed in quantity the
metallic currency which it superseded, prices of course rise;
things which were worth 5l. in metallic money, become worth 6l.
in inconvertible paper, or more, as the case may be. But this
rise of price will not, as in the cases before examined,
stimulate import, and discourage export. The imports and exports
are determined by the metallic prices of things, not by the paper
prices: and it is only when the paper is exchangeable at pleasure
for the metals, that paper prices and metallic prices must
correspond. 
    Let us suppose that England is the country which has the
depreciated paper. Suppose that some English production could be
bought, while the currency was still metallic, for 5l., and sold
in France for 5l. 10s., the difference covering the expense and
risk, and affording a profit to the merchant. On account of the
depreciation this commodity will now cost in England 6l., and
cannot be sold in France for more than 5l. 10s., and yet it will
be exported as before. Why? Because the 5l. 10s. which the
exporter can get for it in France, is not depreciated paper, but
gold or silver. and since in England bullion has risen, in the
same proportion with other things-if the merchant brings the gold
or silver to England, he can sell his 5l. 10s. for 6l. 12s., and
obtain as before 10 per cent for profit and expenses. 
    It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does not
affect the foreign trade of the country: this is carried on
precisely as if the currency maintained its value. But though the
trade is not affected, the exchanges are. When the imports and
exports are in equilibrium, the exchange, in a metallic currency,
would be at par; a bill on France for the equivalent of five
sovereigns, would be worth five sovereigns. But five sovereigns,
or the quantity of gold contained in them, having come to be
worth in England 6l., it follows that a bill on France for 5l.
will be worth 6l. When, therefore, the real exchange is at par,
there will be a nominal exchange against the country, of as much
per cent as the amount of the depreciation. If the currency is
depreciated 10, 15, or 20 per cent, then in whatever way the real
exchange, arising from the variations of international debts and
credits, may vary, the quoted exchange will always differ 10, 15,
or 20 per cent from it. However high this nominal premium may be,
it has no tendency to send gold out of the country, for the
purpose of drawing a bill against it and profiting by the
premium; because the gold so sent must be procured, not from the
banks and at par, as in the case of a convertible currency, but
in the market at an advance of price equal to the premium. In
such cases, instead of saying that the exchange is unfavourable,
it would be a more correct representation to say that the par has
altered, since there is now required a larger quantity of English
currency to be equivalent to the same quantity of foreign. The
exchanges, however, continue to be computed according to the
metallic par. The quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a
depreciated currency, are compounded of two elements or factors;
the real exchange, which follows the variations of international
payments, and the nominal exchange, which varies with the
depreciation of the currency, but which, while there is any
depreciation at all, must always be unfavourable. Since the
amount of depreciation is exactly measured by the degree in which
the market price of bullion exceeds the Mint valuation, we have a
sure criterion to determine what portion of the quoted exchange,
being referable to depreciation, may be struck off as nominal;
the result so corrected expressing the real exchange. 
    The same disturbance of the exchanges and of international
trade, which is produced by an increased issue of convertible
bank notes, is in like manner produced by those extensions of
credit, which, as was so fully shown in a preceding chapter, have
the same effect on prices as an increase of the currency.
Whenever circumstances have given such an impulse to the spirit
of speculation as to occasion a great increase of purchases on
credit, money prices rise, just as much as they would have risen
if each person who so buys on credit had bought with money. All
the effects, therefore, must be similar. As a consequence of high
prices, exportation is checked and importation stimulated; though
in fact the increase of importation seldom waits for the rise of
prices which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some
of the great articles of import are usually among the things in
which speculative overtrading first shows itself. There is,
therefore, in such periods, usually a great excess of imports
over exports; and when the time comes at which these must be paid
for, the exchanges become unfavourable, and gold flows out of the
country. In what precise manner this efflux of gold takes effect
on prices, depends on circumstances of which we shall presently
speak more fully; but that its effect is to make them recoil
downwards, is certain and evident. The recoil, once begun,
generally becomes a total rout, and the unusual extension of
credit is rapidly exchanged for an unusual contraction of it.
Accordingly, when credit has been imprudently stretched, and the
speculative spirit carried to excess, the turn of the exchanges,
and consequent pressure on the banks to obtain gold for
exportation, are generally the proximate cause of the
catastrophe. But these phenomena, though a conspicuous
accompaniment, are no essential part, of the collapse of credit
called a commercial crisis; which, as we formerly showed,(2*)
might happen to as great an extent, and is quite as likely to
happen, in a country, if any such there were, altogether
destitute of foreign trade. 

NOTES:

1. I am here supposing a state of things in which gold and silver
mining are a permanent branch of industry, carried on under known
conditions; and not the present state of uncertainty, in which
gold-gathering is a game of chance, prosecuted (for the present)
in the spirit of an adventure, not in that of a regular
industrial pursuit.

2. Supra, pp. 540-1.

