The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 21

Of the Distribution of the Precious Metals Through the Commercial
World

    1. Having now examined the mechanism by which the commercial
transactions between nations are actually conducted, we have next
to inquire whether this mode of conducting them makes any
difference in the conclusions respecting international values,
which we previously arrived at on the hypothesis of barter. 
    The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the negative. We
did not find that the intervention of money and its substitutes
made any difference in the law of value as applied to adjacent
places. Things which would have been equal in value if the mode
of exchange had been by barter, are worth equal sums of money.
The introduction of money is a mere addition of one more
commodity, of which the value is regulated by the same laws as
that of all other commodities. We shall not be surprised,
therefore, if we find that international values also are
determined by the same causes under a money and bill system, as
they would be under a system of barter; and that money has little
to do in the matter, except to furnish a convenient mode of
comparing values. 
    All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: whoever
sells commodities for money, and with that money buys other
goods, really buys those goods with his own commodities. And so
of nations: their trade is a mere exchange of exports for
imports: and whether money is employed or not, things are only in
their permanent state when the exports and imports exactly pay
for each other. When this is the case, equal sums of money are
due from each country to the other, the debts are settled by
bills, and there is no balance to be paid in the precious metals.
The trade is in a state like that which is called in mechanics a
condition of stable equilibrium. 
    But the process by which things are brought back to this
state when they happen to deviate from it, is, at least
outwardly, not the same in a barter system and in a money system.
Under the first, the country which wants more imports than its
exports will pay for, must offer its exports at a cheaper rate,
as the sole means of creating a demand for them sufficient to
re-establish the equilibrium. When money is used, the country
seems to do a thing totally different. She takes the additional
imports at the same price as before, and as she exports no
equivalent, the balance of payments turns against her; the
exchange becomes unfavourable, and the difference has to be paid
in money. This is in appearance a very distinct operation from
the former. Let us see if it differs in its essence, or only in
its mechanism. 
    Let the country which has the balance to pay be England, and
the country which receives it, France. By this transmission of
the precious metals, the quantity of the currency is diminished
in England, and increased in France. This I am at liberty to
assume. As we shall see hereafter, it would be a very erroneous
assumption if made in regard to all payments of international
balances. A balance which has only to be paid once, such as the
payment made for an extra importation of corn in a season of
dearth, may be paid from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers,
without acting on the circulation. But we are now supposing that
there is an excess of imports over exports, arising from the fact
that the equation of international demand is not yet established:
that there is at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in
England for more French goods than the English goods required in
France at the ordinary prices will pay for. When this is the
case, if a change were not made in the prices, there would be a
perpetually renewed balance to be paid in money. The imports
require to be permanently diminished, or the exports to be
increased; which can only be accomplished through prices; and
hence, even if the balances are at first paid from hoards, or by
the exportation of bullion, they will reach the circulation at
last, for until they do, nothing can stop the drain. 
    When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the
equation of international demand cannot establish itself, the
country requiring more imports than can be paid for by the
exports; it is a sign that the country has more of the precious
metals or their substitutes, in circulation, than can permanently
circulate, and must necessarily part with some of them before the
balance can be restored. The currency is accordingly contracted:
prices fall, and among the rest, the prices of exportable
articles; for which, accordingly, there arises, in foreign
countries, a greater demand: while imported commodities have
possibly risen in price, from the influx of money into foreign
countries, and at all events have not participated in the general
fall. But until the increased cheapness of English goods induces
foreign countries to take a greater pecuniary value, or until the
increased dearness (positive or comparative) of foreign goods
makes England take a less pecuniary value, the exports of England
will be no nearer to paying for the imports than before, and the
stream of the precious metals which had begun to flow out of
England, will still flow on. This efflux will continue, until the
fall of prices in England brings within reach of the foreign
market some commodity which England did not previously send
thither; or until the reduced price of the things which she did
send, has forced a demand abroad for a sufficient quantity to pay
for the imports, aided, perhaps, by a reduction of the English
demand for foreign goods, through their enhanced price, either
positive or comparative. 
    Now this is the very process which took place on our original
supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the trade
between nations tend to the same equilibrium between exports and
imports, whether money is employed or not, but the means by which
this equilibrium is established are essentially the same. The
country whose exports are not sufficient to pay for her imports,
offers them on cheaper terms, until she succeeds in forcing the
necessary demand: in other words, the Equation of International
Demand, under a money system as well as under a barter system, is
the law of international trade. Every country exports and imports
the very same things, and in the very same quantity, under the
one system as under the other. In a barter system, the trade
gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports exactly
exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money system, it
gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports and the
sum of the exports exchange for the same quantity of money. And
since things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one
another, the exports and imports which are equal in money price,
would, if money were not used, precisely exchange for one
another. (1*)
    2. It thus appears that the law of international values, and,
consequently, the division of the advantages of trade among the
nations which carry it on, are the same, on the supposition of
money, as they would be in a state of barter. In international,
as in ordinary domestic interchanges, money is to commerce only
what oil is to machinery, or railways to locomotion-a contrivance
to diminish friction. In order still further to test these
conclusions, let us proceed to re-examine, on the supposition of
money, a question which we have already investigated on the
hypothesis of barter, namely, to what extent the benefit of an
improvement in the production of an exportable article, is
participated in by the countries importing it. 
    The improvement may either consist in the cheapening of some
article which was already a staple production of the country, or
in the establishment of some new branch of industry, or of some
process rendering an article exportable which had not till then
been exported at all. It will be convenient to begin with the
case of a new export, as being somewhat the simpler of the two. 
    The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a
demand arises for it abroad. This new exportation disturbs the
balance, turns the exchanges, money flows into the country (which
we shall suppose to be England), and continues to flow until
prices rise. This higher range of prices will somewhat check the
demand in foreign countries for the new article of export; and
diminish the demand which existed abroad for the other things
which England was in the habit of exporting. The exports will
thus be diminished; while at the same time the English public,
having more money, will have a greater power of purchasing
foreign commodities. If they make use of this increased power of
purchase, there will be an increase of imports: and by this, and
the check to exportation, the equilibrium of imports and exports
will be restored. The result to foreign countries will be, that
they have to pay dearer than before for their other imports, and
obtain the new commodity cheaper than before, but not so much
cheaper as England herself does. I say this, being well aware
that the article would be actually at the very same price (cost
of carriage excepted) in England and in other countries. The
cheapness, however, of the article is not measured solely by the
money-price, but by that price compared with the money incomes of
the consumers. The price is the same to the English and to the
foreign consumers; but the former pay that price from money
incomes which have been increased by the new distribution of the
precious metals; while the latter have had their money incomes
probably diminished by the same cause. The trade, therefore, has
not imparted to the foreign consumer the whole, but only a
portion, of the benefit which the English consumer has derived
from the improvement; while England has also benefited in the
prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then, any industrial
improvement which leads to the opening of a new branch of export
trade, benefits a country not only by the cheapness of the
article in which the improvement has taken place, but by a
general cheapening of all imported products. 
    Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the
improvement, instead of creating a new export from England,
cheapens an existing one. When we examined this case on the
supposition of barter, it appeared to us that the foreign
consumers might either obtain the same benefit from the
improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a
greater benefit, according to the degree in which the consumption
of the cheapened article is calculated to extend itself as the
article diminishes in price. The same conclusions will be found
true on the supposition of money. 
    Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be cloth.
The first effect of the improvement is that its price falls, and
there is an increased demand for it in the foreign market. But
this demand is of uncertain amount. Suppose the foreign consumers
to increase their purchases in the exact ratio of the cheapness,
or in other words, to lay out in cloth the same sum of money as
before, the same aggregate payment as before will be due from
foreign countries to England; the equilibrium of exports and
imports will remain undisturbed, and foreigners will obtain the
full advantage of the increased cheapness of cloth. But if the
foreign demand for cloth is of such a character as to increase in
a greater ratio than the cheapness, a larger sum than formerly
will be due to England for cloth, and when paid will raise
English prices, the price of cloth included; this rise, however,
will affect only the foreign purchaser, English incomes being
raised in a corresponding proportion; and the foreign consumer
will thus derive a less advantage than England from the
improvement. If, on the contrary, the cheapening of cloth does
not extend the foreign demand for it in a proportional degree, a
less sum of debts than before will be due to England for cloth,
while there will be the usual sum of debts due from England to
foreign countries; the balance of trade will turn against
England, money will be exported, prices (that of cloth included)
will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened to the foreign
purchaser in a still greater ratio, than the improvement has
cheapened it to England. These are the very conclusions which we
deduced on the hypothesis of barter. 
    The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better
summed up than in the words of Ricardo.(2*) "Gold and silver
having been chosen for the general medium of circulation, they
are, by the competition of commerce, distributed in such
proportions amongst the different countries of the world as to
accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would take
place if no such metals existed, and the trade between countries
were purely a trade of barter." Of this principle, so fertile in
consequences, previous to which the theory of foreign trade was
an unintelligible chaos, Mr. Ricardo, though he did not pursue it
into its ramifications, was the real originator. No writer who
preceded him appears to have had a glimpse of it: and few are
those who even since his time have had an adequate conception of
its scientific value. 

    3. It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner this law of
the distribution of the precious metals by means of the
exchanges, affects the exchange value of money itself; and how it
tallies with the law by which we found that the value of money is
regulated when imported as a mere article of merchandize. For
there is here a semblance of contradiction, which has, I think,
contributed more than anything else to make some distinguished
political economists resist the evidence of the preceding
doctrines. Money, they justly think, is no exception to the
general laws of value; it is a commodity like any other, and its
average or natural value must depend on the cost of producing, or
at least of obtaining it. That its distribution through the
world, therefore, and its different value in different places,
should be liable to be altered, not by causes affecting itself,
but by a hundred causes unconnected with it; by everything which
affects the trade in other commodities, so as to derange the
equilibrium of exports and imports; appears to these thinkers a
doctrine altogether inadmissible. 
    But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance. The causes
which bring money into or carry it out of a country through the
exchanges, to restore the equilibrium of trade, and which thereby
raise its value in some countries and lower it in others, are the
very same causes on which the local value of money would depend,
if it were never imported except as a merchandize, and never
except directly from the mines. When the value of money in a
country is permanently lowered by an influx of it through the
balance of trade, the cause, if it is not diminished cost of
production, must be one of those causes which compel a new
adjustment, more favourable to the country, of the equation of
international demand: namely, either an increased demand abroad
for her commodities, or a diminished demand on her part for those
of foreign countries. Now an increased foreign demand for the
commodities of a country, or a diminished demand in the country
for imported commodities, are the very causes which, on the
general principles of trade, enable a country to purchase all
imports, and consequently the precious metals, at a lower value.
There is therefore no contradiction, but the most perfect
accordance in the results of the two different modes in which the
precious metals may be obtained. When money flows from country to
country in consequence of changes in the international demand for
commodities, and by so doing alters its own local value, it
merely realizes, by a more rapid process, the effect which would
otherwise take place more slowly, by an alteration in the
relative breadth of the streams by which the precious metals flow
into different regions of the earth from the mining countries. As
therefore we before saw that the use of money as a medium of
exchange does not in the least alter the law on which the values
of other things, either in the same country or internationally,
depend, so neither does it alter the law of the value of the
precious metal itself: and there is in the whole doctrine of
international values as now laid down, a unity and harmony which
is a strong collateral presumption of truth. 

    4. Before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point out
in what manner and degree the preceding conclusions are affected
by the existence of international payments not originating in
commerce, and for which no equivalent in either money or
commodities is expected or received; such as a tribute, or
remittances of rent to absentee landlords, or of interest to
foreign creditors, or a government expenditure abroad, such as
England incurs in the management of some of her colonial
dependencies. 
    To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual
remittances being made in commodities, and being exports for
which there is to be no return, it is no longer requisite that
the imports and exports should pay for one another: on the
contrary, there must be an annual excess of exports over imports,
equal to the value of the remittance. If, before the country
became liable to the annual payment, foreign commerce was in its
natural state of equilibrium, it will now be necessary for the
purpose of effecting the remittance, that foreign countries
should be induced to take a greater quantity of exports than
before: which can only be done by offering those exports on
cheaper terms, or in other words, by paying dearer for foreign
commodities. The international values will so adjust themselves
that either by greater exports, or smaller imports, or both, the
requisite excess on the side of exports will be brought about;
and this excess will become the permanent state. The result is
that a country which makes regular payments to foreign countries,
besides losing what it pays, loses also something more, by the
less advantageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its
productions for foreign commodities. 
    The same results follow on the supposition of money. Commerce
being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium when the
obligatory remittances begin, the first remittance is necessarily
made in money. This lowers prices in the remitting country, and
rises them in the receiving. The natural effect is that more
commodities are exported than before, and fewer imported, and
that, on the score of commerce alone, a balance of money will be
constantly due from the receiving to the paying country. When the
debt thus annually due to the tributary country becomes equal to
the annual tribute or other regular payment due from it, no
further transmission of money takes place; the equilibrium of
exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of payments
will; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will be set off
against one another, and the tribute or remittance will be
virtually paid in goods. The result to the interest of the two
countries will be as already pointed out: the paying country will
give a higher price for all that it buys from the receiving
country, while the latter, besides receiving the tribute, obtains
the exportable produce of the tributary country at a lower price.


NOTES:

1. The subjoined extract from the separate Essay previously
referred to, will give some assistance in following the course of
the phenomena. It is adapted to the imaginary case used for
frustration throughout that Essay, the case of a trade between
England and Germany in cloth and linen. 
    "We may, at first, make whatever supposition we will with
respect to the value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that
before the opening of the trade, the price of cloth is the same
in both countries, namely, six shillings per yard. As ten yards
of cloth were supposed to exchange in England for 15 yards of
linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that linen is sold in
England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at three. Cost of
carriage and importer's profit are left, as before, out of
consideration. 
    "In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be
exported from England into Germany: but linen can be imported
from Germany into England. It will be so; and, in the first
instance, the linen will be paid for in money.
    "The efflux of money from England, and its influx into
Germany, will raise money prices in the latter country, and lower
them in the former. Linen will rise in Germany above three
shillings per yard, and cloth above six shillings. Linen in
England, being imported from Germany, will (since cost of
carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same price as in that
country, while cloth will fall below six shillings. As soon as
the price of cloth is lower in England than in Germany, it will
begin to be exported, and the price of cloth in Germany will fall
to what it is in England. As long as the cloth exported does not
suffice to pay for the linen imported, money will continue to
flow from England into Germany, and prices generally will
continue to fall in England and rise in Germany. By the fall,
however, of cloth in England, cloth will fall in Germany also,
and the demand for it will increase. By the rise of linen in
Germany, linen must rise in England also, and the demand for it
will diminish. As cloth fell in price and linen rose, there would
be some particular price of both articles at which the cloth
exported and the linen imported would exactly pay for each other.
At this point prices would remain, because money would then cease
to move out of England into Germany. What this point might be,
would entirely depend upon the circumstances and inclinations of
the purchasers on both sides. If the fall of cloth did not much
increase the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen did
not diminish very rapidly the demand for it in England, much
money must pass before the equilibrium is restored; cloth would
fall very much, and linen would rise, until England, perhaps, had
to pay nearly as much for it as when she produced it for herself.
But if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very rapid
increase of the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen
in Germany reduced very rapidly the demand in England from what
it was under the influence of the first cheapness produced by the
opening of the trade; the cloth would very soon suffice to pay
for the linen, little money would pass between the two countries,
and England would derive a large portion of the benefit of the
trade. We have thus arrived at precisely the same conclusion, in
supposing the employment of money, which we found to hold under
the supposition of barter. 
    "In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from
the trade is clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of
the trade, paid six shillings per yard for broadcloth: she now
obtains it at a lower price. This, however, is not the whole of
her advantage. As the money-prices of all her other commodities
have risen, the money-incomes of all her producers have
increased. This is no advantage to them in buying from each
other, because the price of what they buy has risen in the same
ratio with their means of paying for it: but it is an advantage
to them in buying anything which has not risen, and, still more,
anything which has fallen. They, therefore, benefit as consumers
of cloth, not merely to the extent to which cloth has fallen, but
also to the extent to which other prices have risen. Suppose that
this is one-tenth. The same proportion of their [48 these]
money-incomes as before, will suffice to supply their other
wants; and the remainder, being increased one-tenth in amount,
will enable them to purchase one-tenth more cloth than before,
even though cloth had not fallen: but it has fallen; so that they
are doubly gainers. They purchase the same quantity with less
money, and have more to expend upon their other wants. 
    "In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have
fallen. Linen, however, has fallen more than the rest, having
been lowered in price by importation from a country where it was
cheaper; whereas the others have fallen only from the consequent
efflux of money. Notwithstanding, therefore, the general fall of
money-prices, the English producers will be exactly as they were
in all other respects, while they will gain as purchasers of
linen. 
    "The greater the efflux of money required to restore the
equilibrium, the greater will be the gain of Germany, both by the
fall of cloth and by the rise of her general prices. The less the
efflux of money requisite, the greater will be the gain of
England; because the price of linen will continue lower, and her
general prices will not be reduced so much. It must not, however,
be imagined that high money-prices are a good, and low
money-prices an evil, in themselves. But the higher the general
money-prices in any country, the Neater will be that country's
means of purchasing those commodities which, being imported from
abroad, are independent of the causes which keep prices high at
home."
    In practice, the cloth and the linen would not, as here
supposed, be at the same price in England and in Germany: each
would be dearer in money-price in the country which imported than
in that which produced it, by the amount of the cost of carriage,
together with the ordinary profit on the importer's capital for
the average length of time which elapsed before the commodity
could be disposed of. But it does not follow that each country
pays the cost of carriage of the commodity it imports; for the
addition of this item to the price may operate as a greater check
to demand on one side than on the other; and the equation of
international demand, and consequent equilibrium of payments, may
not be maintained. Money would then flow out of one country into
the other, until, in the manner already illustrated, the
equilibrium was restored: and, when this was effected, one
country would be paying more than its own cost of carriage, and
the other less. 

2. Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd. ed. p. 143.

