The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 11

Of Credit, as a Substitute for Money


    1. The functions of credit have been a subject of as much
misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, as any single
topic in Political Economy. This is not owing to any peculiar
difficulty in the theory of the subject, but to the complex
nature of some of the mercantile phenomena arising from the forms
in which credit clothes itself; by which attention is diverted
from the properties of credit in general, to the peculiarities of
its particular forms. 
    As a specimen of the confused notions entertained respecting
the nature of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated language
so often used respecting its national importance. Credit has a
great, but not, as many people seem to suppose, a magical power;
it cannot make something out of nothing. How often is an
extension of credit talked of as equivalent to a creation of
capital, or as if credit actually were capital. It seems strange
that there should be any need to point out, that credit being
only permission to use the capital of another person, the means
of production cannot be increased by it, but only transferred. If
the borrower's means of production and of employing labour are
increased by the credit given him, the lender's are as much
diminished. The same sum cannot be used as capital both by the
owner and also by the person to whom it is lent: it cannot supply
its entire value in wages, tools, and materials, to two sets of
labourers at once. It is true that the capital which A has
borrowed from B, and makes use of in his business, still forms
part of the wealth of B for other purposes: he can enter into
arrangements in reliance on it, and can borrow, when needful, an
equivalent sum on the security of it; so that to a superficial
eye it might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at once.
But the smallest consideration will show that when B has parted
with his capital to A, the use of it as capital rests with A
alone, and that B has no other service from it than in so far as
his ultimate claim upon it serves him to obtain the use of
another capital from a third person C. All capital (not his own)
of which any person has really the use, is, and must be, so much
subtracted from the capital of some one else.(1*) 

    2. But though credit is but a transfer of capital from hand
to hand, it is generally, and naturally, a transfer to hands more
competent to employ the capital efficiently in production. If
there were no such thing as credit, or if, from general
insecurity and want of confidence, it were scantily practised,
many persons who possess more or less of capital, but who, from
their occupations, or for want of the necessary skill and
knowledge, cannot personally superintend its employment, would
derive no benefit from it: their funds would either lie idle, or
would be, perhaps, wasted and annihilated in unskilful attempts
to make them yield a profit. All this capital is now lent at
interest, and made available for production. Capital thus
circumstanced forms a large portion of the productive resources
of any commercial country; and is naturally attracted to those
producers or traders who, being in the greatest business, have
the means of employing it to most advantage; because such are
both the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give the best
security. Although, therefore, the productive funds of the
country are not increased by credit, they are called into a more
complete state of productive activity. As the confidence on which
credit is grounded extends itself, means are developed by which
even the smallest portions of capital, the sums which each person
keeps by him to meet contingencies, are made available for
productive uses. The principal instruments for this purpose are
banks of deposit. Where these do not exist, a prudent person must
keep a sufficient sum unemployed in his own possession, to meet
every demand which he has even a slight reason for thinking
himself liable to. When the practice, however, has grown up of
keeping this reserve not in his own custody but with a banker,
many small sums, previously lying idle, become aggregated in the
banker's hands; and the banker, being taught by experience what
proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a given time,
and knowing that if one depositor happens to require more than
the average, another will require less, is able to lend the
remainder, that is, the far greater part, to producers and
dealers: thereby adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in
existence, but to that in employment, and making a corresponding
addition to the aggregate production of the community. 
    While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the whole
capital of the country productive, it is also a means by which
the industrial talent of the country is turned to better account
for purposes of production. Many a person who has either no
capital of his own, or very little, but who has qualifications
for business which are known and appreciated by some possessors
of capital, is enabled to obtain either advances in money, or
more frequently goods on credit, by which his industrial
capacities are made instrumental to the increase of the public
wealth; and this benefit will be reaped far more largely,
whenever, through better laws and better education, the community
shall have made such progress in integrity, that personal
character can be accepted as a sufficient guarantee not only
against dishonestly appropriating, but against dishonestly
risking, what belongs to another. 
    Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of
credit to the productive resources of the world. But these
considerations only apply to the credit given to the industrious
classes-to producers and dealers. Credit given by dealers to
unproductive consumers is never an addition, but always a
detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It makes over in
temporary use, not the capital of the unproductive classes to the
productive, but that of the productive to the unproductive. If A,
a dealer, supplies goods to B, a landowner or annuitant, to be
paid for at the end of five years, as much of the capital of A as
is equal to the value of these goods, remains for five years
unproductive. Wring such a period, if payment had been made at
once, the sum might have been several times expended and
replaced, and goods to the amount might have been several times
produced, consumed, and reproduced: consequently B's withholding
100l. for five years, even if he pays at last, has cost to the
labouring classes of the community during that period an absolute
loss of probably several times that amount. A, individually, is
compensated, by putting a higher price upon his goods, which is
ultimately paid by B: but there is no compensation made to the
labouring classes, the chief sufferers by every diversion of
capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to unproductive
uses. The country has had 100l. less of capital during those five
years, B having taken that amount from A's capital, and spent it
unproductively, in anticipation of his own means, and having only
after five years set apart a sum from his income and converted it
into capital for the purpose of indemnifying A. 

    3. Thus far of the general functions of Credit in production.
It is not a productive power in itself, though, without it, the
productive powers already existing could not be brought into
complete employment. But a more intricate portion of the theory
of Credit is its influence on prices; the chief cause of most of
the mercantile phenomena which perplex observers. In a state of
commerce in which much credit is habitually given, general prices
at any moment depend much more upon the state of credit than upon
the quantity of money. For credit, though it is not productive
power, is purchasing power; and a person who, having credit,
avails himself of it in the purchase of goods, creates just as
much demand for the goods, and tends quite as much to raise their
price, as if he made an equal amount of purchases with ready
money. 
    The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as a
distinct purchasing power, independent of money, is of course not
credit in its simplest form, that of money lent by one person to
another, and paid directly into his hands; for when the borrower
expends this in purchases, he makes the purchases with money, not
credit, and exerts no purchasing power over and above that
conferred by the money. The forms of credit which create
purchasing power, are those in which no money passes at the time,
and very often none passes at all, the transaction being included
with a mass of other transactions in an account, and nothing paid
but a balance. This takes place in a variety of ways, which we
shall proceed to examine, beginning, as is our custom, with the
simplest. 
    First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have
transactions with each other both as buyers and as sellers. A
buys from B on credit. B does the like with respect to A. At the
end of the year, the sum of A's debts to B is set against the sum
of B's debts to A, and it is ascertained to which side a balance
is due. This balance, which may be less than the amount of many
of the transactions singly, and is necessarily less than the sum
of the transactions, is all that is paid in money. and perhaps
even this is not paid, but carried over in an account current to
the next year. A single payment of a hundred pounds may in this
manner suffice to liquidate a long series of transactions, some
of them to the value of thousands. 
    But secondly. The debts of A to B may be paid without the
intervention of money, even though there be no reciprocal debts
of B to A. A may satisfy B by making over to him a debt due to
himself from a third person, C. This is conveniently done by
means of a written instrument, called a bill of exchange, which
is, in fact, a transferable order by a creditor upon his debtor,
and when accepted by the debtor, that is authenticated by his
signature, becomes an acknowledgment of debt. 

    4. Bills of exchange were first introduced to save the
expense and risk of transporting the precious metals from place
to place. "Let it be supposed," says Mr Henry Thornton,(2*) "that
there are in London ten manufacturers who sell their article to
ten shopkeepers in York, by whom it is retailed; and that there
are in York ten manufacturers of another commodity, who sell it
to ten shopkeepers in London. There would be no occasion for the
ten shopkeepers in London to send yearly to York guineas for the
payment of the York manufacturers, and for the ten York
shopkeepers to send yearly as many guineas to London. It would
only be necessary for the York manufacturers to receive from each
of the shopkeepers at their own door the money in question,
giving in return letters which should acknowledge the receipt of
it; and which should also direct the money, lying ready in the
hands of their debtors in London, to be paid to the London
manufacturers, so as to cancel the debt in London in the same
manner as that at York. The expense and the risk of all
transmission of money would thus he saved. Letters ordering the
transfer of the debt are termed, in the language of the present
day, bills of exchange. They are bills by which the debt of one
person is exchanged for the debt of another; and the debt,
perhaps, which is due in one place, for the debt due in another."

    Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means of
paying debts at distant places without the expense of
transporting the precious metals, their use was afterwards
greatly extended from another motive. It is usual in every trade
to give a certain length of credit for goods bought: three
months, six months, a year, even two years, according to the
convenience or custom of the particular trade. A dealer who has
sold goods, for which he is to be paid in six months, but who
desires to receive payment sooner, draws a bill on his debtor
payable in six months, and gets the bill discounted by a banker
or other money-lender, that is, transfers the bill to him,
receiving the amount, minus interest for the time it has still to
run. It has become one of the chief functions of bills of
exchange to serve as a means by which a debt due from one person
can thus be made available for obtaining credit from another. The
convenience of the expedient has led to the frequent creation of
bills of exchange not grounded on any debt previously due to the
drawer of the bill by the person on whom it is drawn. These are
called accommodation bills; and sometimes, with a tinge of
disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their nature is so clearly
stated, and with such judicious remarks, by the author whom I
have just quoted, that I shall transcribe the entire passage.(3*)
    "A, being in want of 100l., requests B to accept a note or
bill drawn at two months, which B, therefore, on the face of it,
is bound to pay; it is understood, however, that A will take care
either to discharge the bill himself, or to furnish B with the
means of paying it. A obtains ready money for the bill on the
joint credit of the two parties. A fulfils his promise of paying
it when due, and thus concludes the transaction. This service
rendered by B to A is, however, not unlikely to be requited, at a
more or less distant period, by a similar acceptance of a bill on
A, drawn and discounted for B's convenience. 
    "Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let us
consider in what points they differ, or seem to differ. and in
what they agree. 
    "They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article; each
has also been created for the purpose of being discounted; and
each is, perhaps, discounted in fact. Each, therefore, serves
equally to supply means of speculation to the merchant. So far,
moreover, as bills and notes constitute what is called the
circulating medium, or paper currency of the country, and prevent
the use of guineas, the fictitious and the real bill are upon an
equality. and if the price of commodities be raised in proportion
to the quantity of paper currency, the one contributes to that
rise exactly in the same manner as the other. 
    "Before we come to the points in which they differ, let us
advert to one point in which they are commonly supposed to be
unlike; but in which they cannot be said always or necessarily to
differ. 
    "Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual property.
There are actual goods in existence, which are the counterpart to
every real note. Notes which are not drawn in consequence of a
sale of goods, are a species of false wealth, by which a nation
is deceived. These supply only an imaginary capital; the others
indicate one that is real. 
    "In answer to this statement it may be observed, first, that
the notes given in consequence of a real sale of goods cannot be
considered as on that account certainly representing any actual
property. Suppose that A sells 100l. worth of goods to B at six
months' credit, and takes a bill at six months for it; and that
B, within a month after, sells the same goods, at a like credit,
to C, taking a like bill; and again, that C, after another month,
sells them to D, taking a like bill, and so on. There may then,
at the end of six months, be six bills of 100l. each, existing at
the same time; and every one of these may possibly have been
discounted. Of all these bills, then, only one represents any
actual property. 
    "In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it
is called) represents actual property, there ought to be some
power in the bill-holder to prevent the property which the bill
represents, from being turned to other purposes than that of
paying the bill in question. No such power exists; neither the
man who holds the real bill, nor the man who discounts it, has
any property in the specific goods for which it was given : he as
much trusts to the general ability to pay of the giver of the
bill, as the holder of any fictitious bill does. The fictitious
bill may, in many cases, be a bill given by a person having a
large and known capital, a part of which the fictitious bill may
be said in that case to represent. The supposition that real
bills represent property, and that fictitious bills do not,
seems, therefore, to be one by which more than justice is done to
one of these species of bills, and something less than justice to
the other. 
    "We come next to some point in which they differ.
    "First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is
liable to the objection that it professes to be what it is not.
This objection, however, lies only against those fictitious bills
which are passed as real. In many cases it is sufficiently
obvious what they are. Secondly, the fictitious bill is, in
general, less likely to be punctually paid than the real one.
There is a general presumption, that the dealer in fictitious
bills is a man who is a more adventurous speculator than he who
carefully abstains from them. It follows, thirdly, that
fictitious bills, besides being less safe, are less subject to
limitation as to their quantity. The extent of a man's actual
sales forms some limit to the amount of his real notes; and as it
is highly desirable in commerce that credit should be dealt out
to all persons in some sort of regular and due proportion, the
measure of a man's actual sales, certified by the appearance of
his bills drawn in virtue of those sales, is some rule in the
case, though a very imperfect one in many respects. 
    "A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently in
substance the same as any common promissory note; and even better
in this respect, that there is but one security to the promissory
note, whereas in the case of the bill of accommodation, there are
two. So much jealousy subsists lest traders should push their
means of raising money too far, that paper, the same in its
general nature with that which is given, being the only paper
which can be given, by men out of business, is deemed somewhat
discreditable when coming from a merchant. And because such
paper, when in the merchant's hand, necessarily imitates the
paper, which passes on the occasion of a sale of goods, the
epithet fictitious has been cast upon it; an epithet which haS
seemed to countenance the confused and mistaken notion, that
there is something altogether false and delusive in the nature of
a certain part both of the paper and of the apparent wealth of
the country."
    A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in the
portfolio of the discounter until it falls due, does not perform
the functions or supply the place of money, but is itself bought
and sold for money. It is no more currency than the public funds,
or any other securities. But when a bill drawn upon one person is
paid to another (or even to the same person) in discharge of a
debt or a pecuniary claim, it does something for which, if the
bill did not exist, money would be required: it performs the
functions of currency. This is a use to which bills of exchange
are often applied. "They not only," continues Mr. Thornton,(4*)
"spare the use of ready money; they also occupy its place in many
cases. Let us imagine a farmer in the country to discharge a debt
of 10l. to his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a bill for that
sum, drawn on his corn-factor in London for grain sold in the
metropolis; and the grocer to transit the bill, he having
previously indorsed it to a neighbouring sugar-baker, in
discharge of a like debt; and the sugar-baker to send it, when
again indorsed, to a West India merchant in an outport, and the
West India merchant to deliver it to his country banker, who also
indorses it, and sends it into further circulation. The bill in
this case will have effected five payments, exactly as if it were
a 10l. note payable to a bearer on demand. A multitude of bills
pass between trader and trader in the country, in the manner
which has been described; and they evidently form, in the
strictest sense, a part of the circulating medium of the
kingdom."
    Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at least presented
for payment quite covered with indorsements, each of which
represents either a fresh discounting, or a pecuniary transaction
in which the bill has performed the functions of money. Within
the present generation, the circulating medium of Lancashire for
sums above five pounds, was almost entirely composed of such
bills. 

    5. A third form in which credit is employed as a substitute
for currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill drawn upon any
one and accepted by him, and a note of hand by him promising to
pay the same sum, are, as far as he is concerned, exactly
equivalent, except that the former commonly bears interest and
the latter generally does not'. and that the former is commonly
payable only after a certain lapse of time, and the latter
payable at sight. But it is chiefly in the latter form that it
has become in commercial countries, an express occupation to
issue such substitutes for money. Dealers in money (as lenders by
profession are improperly called) desire, like other dealers, to
stretch their operations beyond what can be carried on by their
own means: they wish to lend, not their capital merely, but their
credit, and not only such portion of their credit as consists of
funds actually deposited with them, but their power of obtaining
credit from the public generally, so far as they think they can
safely employ it. This is done in a very convenient manner by
lending their own promissory notes payable to bearer on demand:
the borrower being willing to accept these as so much money,
because the credit of the lender makes other people willingly
receive them on the same footing, in purchases or other payments.
These notes, therefore, perform all the functions of currency,
and render an equivalent amount of money which was previously in
circulation, unnecessary. As, however, being payable on demand,
they may be at any time returned on the issuer, and money
demanded for them, he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep by him as
much money as will enable him to meet any claims of that sort
which can be expected to occur within the time necessary for
providing himself with more: and prudence also requires that he
should not attempt to issue notes beyond the amount which
experience shows can remain in circulation without being
presented for payment. 
    The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining credit,
having once been discovered, governments have availed themselves
of the same expedient, and have issued their own promissory notes
in payment of their expenses; a resource the more useful, because
it is the only mode in which they are able to borrow money
without paying interest, their promises to pay on demand being,
in the estimation of the holders, equivalent to money in hand.
The practical differences between such government notes and the
issues of private bankers, and the further diversities of which
this class of substitutes for money are susceptible, will be
considered presently. 

    6. A fourth mode of making credit answer the purposes of
money, by which, when carried far enough, money may be very
completely superseded, consists in making payments by cheques.
The custom of keeping the spare cash reserved for immediate use
or against contingent demands, in the hands of a banker, and
making all payments, except small ones, by orders on bankers, is
in this country spreading to a continually larger portion of the
public. If the person making the payment, and the person
receiving it, keep their money with the same banker, the payment
takes place without any intervention of money, by the mere
transfer of its amount in the banker's books from the credit of
the payer to that of the receiver. If all persons in London kept
their cash at the same banker's and made all their payments by
means of cheques, no money would be required or used for any
transactions beginning and terminating in London. This ideal
limit is almost attained in fact, so far as regards transactions
between dealers. It is chiefly in the retail transactions between
dealers and consumers, and in the payment of wages, that money or
bank notes now pass, and then only when the amounts are small. In
London, even shopkeepers of any amount of capital or extent of
business have generally an account with a banker; which, besides
the safety and convenience of the practice, is to their advantage
in another respect, by giving them an understood claim to have
their bills discounted in cases when they could not otherwise
expect it. As for the merchants and larger dealers, they
habitually make all payments in the course of their business by
cheques. They do not, however, all deal with the same banker, and
when A gives a cheque to B, B usually pays it not into the same
but into some other bank. But the convenience of business has
given birth to an arrangement which makes all the banking houses
of the City of London, for certain purposes, virtually one
establishment. A banker does not send the cheques which are paid
into his banking house, to the banks on which they are drawn, and
demand money for them. There is a building called the
Clearing-house, to which every City banker sends, each afternoon,
all the cheques on other bankers which he has received during the
day, and they are there exchanged for the cheques on him which
have come into the hands of other bankers, the balances only
being paid in money; or even these not in money, but in cheques
on the Bank of England. By this contrivance, all the business
transactions of the City of London during that day, amounting
often to millions of pounds, and a vast amount besides of country
transactions, represented by bills which country bankers have
drawn upon their London correspondents, are liquidated by
payments not exceeding on the average 200,000l. (5*)
    By means of the various instruments of credit which have now
been explained, the immense business of a country like Great
Britain is transacted with an amount of the precious metals
surprisingly small; many times smaller, in proportion to the
pecuniary value of the commodities bought and sold, than is found
necessary in France, or any other country in which, the habit and
the disposition to give credit not being so generally diffused,
these "economizing expedients," as they have been called, are not
practised to the same extent. What becomes of the money thus
superseded in its functions, and by what process it is made to
disappear from circulation, are questions the discussion of which
must be for a short time postponed. 



NOTES:

1. To make the proposition in the text strictly true, a
corrective, though a very slight one, requires to be made. The
circulating medium existing in a country at a given time, is
partly employed in purchases for productive, and partly for
unproductive consumption. According as a larger proportion of it
is employed in the one way or in the other, the real capital of
the country is greater or less. If, then, an addition were made
to the circulating medium in the hands of unproductive consumers
exclusively, a larger portion of the existing stock of
commodities would be bought for unproductive consumption, and a
smaller for productive, which state of things, while it lasted,
would be equivalent to a diminution of capital; and on the
contrary, if the addition made be to the portion of the
circulating medium which is in the hands of producers, and
destined for their business, a greater portion of the commodities
in the country will for the present be employed as capital, and a
less portion unproductively. Now an effect of this latter
character naturally attends some extensions of credit, especially
when taking place in the form of bank notes, or other instruments
of exchange. The additional bank notes are, in ordinary course,
first issued to producers or dealers, to be employed as capital:
and though the stock of commodities in the country is no greater
than before, yet as a greater share of that stock now comes by
purchase into the hands of producers and dealers, to that extent
what would have been unproductively consumed is applied to
production, and there is a real increase of capital. The effect
ceases, and a counter-process takes place, when the additional
credit is stopped, and the notes called in. 

2. Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of
Great Britain, p. 24. This work, published in 1802, is even now
the clearest exposition that I am acquainted with, in the English
language, of the modes in which credit is given and taken in a
mercantile community.

3. Pp. 29-33.

4. P. 40.

5. According to Mr. Tooke (Inquiry into the Currency Principle,
p. 27) the adjustments at the clearing-house "in the year 1839
amounted to 954,401,600l., making an average amount of payments
of upwards of 3,000,000l. of bills of exchange and cheques daily
effected through the medium of little more than 200,0001. of bank
notes." At present a very much greater amount of transactions is
daily liquidated, without bank notes at all, cheques on the Bank
of England supplying their place. 

