The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 16

Of Some Peculiar Cases of Value

     1.  The general laws of value, in all the more important
cases of the interchange of commodities in the same country, have
now been investigated. We examined, first, the case of monopoly,
in which the value is determined by either a natural or an
artificial limitation of quantity, that is, by demand and supply;
secondly, the case of free competition, when the article can be
produced in indefinite quantity at the same cost; in which case
the permanent value is determined by the cost of production, and
only the fluctuations by supply and demand; thirdly, a mixed
case, that of the articles which can be produced in indefinite
quantity, but not at the same cost; in which case the permanent
value is determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary to
incur in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we have
found that money itself is a commodity of the third class; that
its value, in a state of freedom, is governed by the same laws as
the values of other commodities of its class; and that prices,
therefore, follow the same laws as values. 
    From this it appears that demand and supply govern the
fluctuations of values and prices in all cases, and the permanent
values and prices of all things of which the supply is determined
by any agency other than that of free competition: but that,
under the regime of competition, things are, on the average,
exchanged for each other at such values, and sold at such prices,
as afford equal expectation of advantage to all classes of
producers; which can only be when things exchange for one another
in the ratio of their cost of production. 
    It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain
cases, to which, from their peculiar nature, this law of exchange
value is inapplicable. 
    It sometimes happens that two different commodities have what
may be termed a joint cost of production. They are both products
of the same operation, or set of operations, and the outlay is
incurred for the sake of both together, not part for one and part
for the other. The same outlay would have to be incurred for
either of the two, if the other were not wanted or used at all.
There are not a few instances of commodities thus associated in
their production. For example, coke and coal-gas are both
produced from the same material, and by the same operation. In a
more partial sense, mutton and wool are an example: beef, hides,
and tallow: calves and dairy produce: chickens and eggs. Cost of
production can have nothing to do with deciding the value of the
associated commodities relatively to each other. It only decides
their joint value. The gas and the coke together have to repay
the expenses of their production, with the ordinary profit. To do
this, a given quantity of gas, together with the coke which is
the residuum of its manufacture, must exchange for other things
in the ratio of their joint cost of production. But how much of
the remuneration of the producer shall be derived from the coke,
and how much from the gas, remains to be decided. Cost of
production does not determine their prices, hut the sum of their
prices. A principle is wanting to apportion the expenses of
production between the two. 
    Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to a
law of value anterior to cost of production, and more
fundamental, the law of demand and supply. The law is, that the
demand for a commodity varies with its value, and that the value
adjusts itself so that the demand shall be equal to the supply.
This supplies the principle of repartition which we are in quest
of. 
    Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and sold
at a certain price, and that the residuum of coke is offered at a
price which, together with that of the gas, repays the expenses
with the ordinary rate of profit. Suppose, too, that at the price
put upon the gas and coke respectively, the whole of the gas
finds an easy market, without either surplus or deficiency, but
that purchasers cannot be found for all the coke corresponding to
it. The coke will be offered at a lower price in order to force a
market. But this lower price, together with the price of the gas,
will not be remunerating: the manufacture, as a whole, will not
pay its expenses with the ordinary profit, and will not, on these
terms, continue to be carried on. The gas, therefore, must be
sold at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on the
coke. The demand consequently contracting, the production will be
somewhat reduced; and prices will become stationary when, by the
joint effect of the rise of gas and the fall of coke, so much
less of the first is sold, and so much more of the second, that
there is now a market for all the coke which results from the
existing extent of the gas manufacture. Or suppose the reverse
case; that more coke is wanted at the present prices, than can be
supplied by the operations required by the existing demand for
gas. Coke, being now in deficiency, will rise in price. The whole
operation will yield more than the usual rate of profit, and
additional capital will he attracted to the manufacture. The
unsatisfied demand for coke will he supplied; but this cannot be
done without increasing the supply of gas too; and as the
existing demand was fully supplied already, an increased quantity
can only find a market by lowering the price. The result will be
that the two together will yield the return required by their
joint cost of production, but that more of this return than
before will be furnished by the coke, and less by the gas.
Equilibrium will be attained when the demand for each article
fits so well with the demand for the other, that the quantity
required of each is exactly as much as is generated in producing
the quantity required of the other. If there is any surplus or
deficiency on either side; if there is a demand for coke, and not
a demand for all the gas produced along with it, or vice versa;
the values and prices of the two things will so readjust
themselves that both shall find a market. 
    When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint cost of
production, their natural values relatively to each other are
those which will create a demand for each, in the ratio of the
quantities in which they are sent forth by the productive
process. This theorem is not in itself of any great importance:
but the illustration it affords of the law of demand, and of the
mode in which, when cost of production fails to be applicable,
the other principle steps in to supply the vacancy, is worthy of
particular attention, as we shall find in the next chapter but
one that something very similar takes place in cases of much
greater moment. 

    2. Another case of values which merits attention, is that of
the different kinds of agricultural produce. This is rather a
more complex question that the last, and requires that attention
should be paid to a greater number of influencing circumstances.
The case would present nothing peculiar, if different
agricultural products were either grown indiscriminately and with
equal advantage on the same soils, or wholly on different soils.
The difficulty arises from two things: first, that most soils are
fitter for one kind of produce than another, without being
absolutely unfit for any; and secondly, the rotation of crops. 
    For simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two kinds
of agricultural produce; for instance, wheat and oats. If all
soils were equally adapted for wheat and for oats, both would be
grown indiscriminately on all soils, and their relative cost of
production, being the same everywhere, would govern their
relative value. If the same labour which grows three quarters of
wheat on any given soil, would always grow on that soil five
quarters of oats, the three and the five quarters would be of the
same value. If again, wheat and oats could not be grown on the
same soil at all, the value of each would be determined by its
peculiar cost of production on the least favourable of the soils
adapted for it which the existing demand required a recourse to.
The fact, however, is that both wheat and oats can be grown on
almost any soil which is capable of producing either: but some
soils, such as the stiff clays, are better adapted for wheat,
while others (the light sandy soils) are more suitable for oats.
There might be some soils which would yield, to the same quantity
of labour, only four quarters of oats to three of wheat; others
perhaps less than three of wheat to five quarters of oats. Among
these diversities, what determines the relative value of the two
things? 
    It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in
preference, on the soils which are better adapted for it than for
the other; and if the demand is supplied from these alone, the
values of the two grains will have no reference to one another.
But when the demand for both is such as to require that each
should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly fitted for it,
but on the medium soils which, without being specifically adapted
to either, are about equally suited for both, the cost of
production on those medium soils will determine the relative
value of the two grains; while the rent of the soils specifically
adapted to each, will be regulated by their productive power,
considered with reference to that one alone to which they are
peculiarly applicable. Thus far the question presents no
difficulty, to any one to whom the general principles of value
are familiar. 
    It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the two,
as for example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for the other,
as not only to occupy the soils specially suited for wheat, but
to engross entirely those equally suitable to both, and even
encroach upon those which are better adapted to oats. To create
an inducement for this unequal apportionment of the cultivation,
wheat must be relatively dearer, and oats cheaper, than according
to the cost of their production on the medium land. Their
relative value must be in proportion to the cost on that quality
of land, whatever it may be, on which the comparative demand for
the two grins requires that both of them should be grown. If,
from the state of the demand, the two cultivations meet on land
more favourable to one than to the other, that one will be
cheaper and the other dearer, in relation to each other and to
things in general, than if the proportional demand were as we at
first supposed. 
    Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat
different manner, of the operation of demand, not as an
occasional disturber of value, but as a permanent regulator of
it, conjoined with, or supplementary to, cost of production. 
    The case of rotation of crops does not require separate
analysis, being a case of joint cost of production, like that of
gas and coke. If it were the practice to grow white and green
crops on all lands in alternate years, the one being necessary as
much for the sake of the other as for its own sake; the farmer
would derive his remuneration for two years' expenses from one
white and one green crop, and the prices of the two would so
adjust themselves as to create a demand which would carry off an
equal breadth of white and of green crops. 
    There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous
cases of value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve:
hut it is neither desirable nor possible, in a work like the
present, to enter more into details than is necessary for the
elucidation of principles. I now therefore proceed to the only
part of the general theory of exchange which has not yet been
touched upon, that of International Exchanges, or to speak more
generally, exchanges between distant places. 

