The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 13

Of an Inconvertible Paper Currency


    1. After experience had shown that pieces of paper, of no
intrinsic value, by merely bearing upon them the written
profession of being equivalent to a certain number of francs,
dollars, or pounds, could be made to circulate as such, and to
produce all the benefit to the issuers which could have been
produced by the coins which they purported to represent;
governments began to think that it would be a happy device if
they could appropriate to themselves this benefit, free from the
condition to which individuals issuing such paper substitutes for
money were subject, of giving, when required, for the sign, the
thing signified. They determined to try whether they could not
emancipate themselves from this unpleasant obligation, and make a
piece of paper issued by them pass for a pound, by merely calling
it a pound, and consenting to receive it in payment of the taxes.
And such is the influence of almost all established governments,
that they have generally succeeded in attaining this object: I
believe I might say they have always succeeded for a time, and
the power has only been lost to them after they had compromised
it by the most flagrant abuse.   In the case supposed, the
functions of money are performed by a thing which derives its
power for performing them solely from convention: but convention
is quite sufficient to confer the power; since nothing more is
needful to make a person accept anything as money, and even at
any arbitrary value, than the persuasion that it will be taken
from him on the same terms by others. The only question is, what
determines the value of such a currency; since it cannot be, as
in the case of gold and silver (or paper exchangeable for them at
pleasure), the cost of production. 
    We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metallic
currency, the immediate agency in determining its value is its
quantity. If the quantity, instead of depending on the ordinary
mercantile motives of profit and loss, could be arbitrarily fixed
by authority, the value would depend on the fiat of that
authority, not on cost of production. The quantity of a paper
currency not convertible into the metals at the option of the
holder, can be arbitrarily fixed; especially if the issuer is the
sovereign power of the state. The value, therefore, of such a
currency, is entirely arbitrary. 
    Suppose that, in a country of which the currency is wholly
metallic, a paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount of
half the metallic circulation; not by a banking establishment, or
in the form of loans, but by the government, in payment of
salaries and purchase of commodities. The currency being suddenly
increased by one-half, all prices will rise, and among the rest,
the prices of all things made of gold and silver. An ounce of
manufactured gold will become more valuable than an ounce of gold
coin, by more than that customary difference which compensates
for the value of the workmanship; and it will be profitable to
melt the coin for the purpose of being manufactured, until as
much has been taken from the currency by the subtraction of gold,
as had been added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices will
relapse to what they were at first, and there will be nothing
changed except that a paper currency has been substituted for
half of the metallic currency which existed before. Suppose, now,
a second emission of paper; the same series of effects will be
renewed; and so on, until the whole of the metallic money has
disappeared: that is, if paper be issued of as low a denomination
as the lowest coin; if not, as much will remain, as convenience
requires for the smaller payments. The addition made to the
quantity of gold and silver disposable for ornamental purposes,
will somewhat reduce, for a time, the value of the article; and
as long as this is the case, even though paper has been issued to
the original amount of the metallic circulation, as much coin
will remain in circulation along with it, as will keep the value
of the currency down to the reduced value of the metallic
material; but the value having fallen below the cost of
production, a stoppage or diminution of the supply from the mines
will enable the surplus to be carried off by the ordinary agents
of destruction, after which, the metals and the currency will
recover their natural value. We are here supposing, as we have
supposed throughout, that the country has mines of its own, and
no commercial intercourse with other countries; or, in a country
having foreign trade, the coin which is rendered superfluous by
an issue of paper is carried off by a much prompter method. 
    Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are
substantially the same, whether it is convertible into specie or
not. It is when the metals have been completely superseded and
driven from circulation, that the difference between convertible
and inconvertible paper begins to be operative. When the gold or
silver has all gone from circulation, and an equal quantity of
paper has taken its place, suppose that a still further issue is
superadded. The same series of phenomena recommences: prices
rise, among the rest the prices of gold and silver articles, and
it becomes an object as before to procure coin in order to
convert it into bullion. There is no longer any coin in
circulation; but if the paper currency is convertible, coin may
still be obtained from the issuers, in exchange for notes. All
additional notes, therefore, which are attempted to be forced
into circulation after the metals have been completely
superseded, will return upon the issuers in exchange for coin;
and they will not be able to maintain in circulation such a
quantity of convertible paper, as to sink its value below the
metal which it represents. It is not so, however, with an
inconvertible currency. To the increase of that (if permitted by
law) there is no check. The issuers may add to it indefinitely,
lowering its value and raising prices in proportion; they may, in
other words, depreciate the currency without limit. 
    Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable evil.
All variations in the value of the circulating medium are
mischievous: they disturb existing contracts and expectations,
and the liability to such changes renders every pecuniary
engagement of long date entirely precarious. The person who buys
for himself, or gives to another, an annuity of 100l., does not
know whether it will be equivalent to 200l. or to 50l. a few
years hence. Great as this evil would be if it depended only on
accident, it is still greater when placed at the arbitrary
disposal of an individual or a body of individuals; who may have
any kind or degree of interest to be served by an artificial
fluctuation in fortunes; and who have at any rate a strong
interest in issuing as much as possible, each issue being in
itself a source of profit. Not to add, that the issuers may have,
and in the case of a government paper, always have, a direct
interest in lowering the value of the currency, because it is the
medium in which their own debts are computed. 

    2. In order that the value of the currency may be secure from
being altered by design, and may be as little as possible liable
to fluctuation from accident, the articles least liable of all
known commodities to vary in their value, the precious metals,
have been made in all civilized countries the standard of value
for the circulating medium; and no paper currency ought to exist
of which the value cannot be made to conform to theirs. Nor has
this fundamental maxim ever been entirely lost sight of, even by
the governments which have most abused the power of creating
inconvertible paper. If they have not (as they generally have)
professed an intention of paying in specie at some indefinite
future time, they have at least, by giving to their paper issues
the names of their coins, made a virtual, though generally a
false, profession of intending to keep them at a value
corresponding to that of the coins. This is not impracticable,
even with an inconvertible paper. There is not indeed the
self-acting check which convertibility brings with it. But there
is a clear and unequivocal indication by which to judge whether
the currency is depreciated, and to what extent. That indication
is, the price of the precious metals. When holders of paper
cannot demand coin to be converted into bullion, and when there
is none left in circulation, bullion rises and falls in price
like other things; and if it is above the Mint price, if an ounce
of gold, which would be coined into the equivalent of 3l. 17s.
101/2d., is sold for 4l. or 5l. in paper, the value of the
currency has sunk just that much below what the value of a
metallic currency would he. If, therefore, the issue of
inconvertible paper were subjected to strict rules, one rule
being that whenever bullion rose above the Mint price, the issues
should he contracted until the market price of bullion and the
Mint price were again in accordance, such a currency would not be
subject to any of the evils usually deemed inherent in an
inconvertible paper. 
    But also such a system of currency would have no advantages
sufficient to recommend it to adoption. An inconvertible
currency, regulated by the price of bullion, would conform
exactly, in all its variations, to a convertible one; and the
only advantage gained, would be that of exemption from the
necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious metals; which is
not a very important consideration, especially as a government,
so long as its good faith is not suspected, needs not keep so
large a reserve as private issuers, being not so liable to great
and sudden demands, since there never can be any real doubt of
its solvency. Against this small advantage is to be set, in the
first place, the possibility of fraudulent tampering with the
price of bullion for the sake of acting on the currency; in the
manner of the fictitious sales of corn, to influence the
averages, so much and so justly complained of while the corn laws
were in force. But a still stronger consideration is the
importance of adhering to a simple principle, intelligible to the
most untaught capacity. Everybody can understand convertibility;
every one sees that what can be at any moment exchanged for five
pounds, is worth five pounds. Regulation by the price of bullion
is a more complex idea, and does not recommend itself through the
same familiar associations. There would be nothing like the same
confidence, by the public generally, in an inconvertible currency
so regulated, as in a convertible one: and the most instructed
person might reasonably doubt whether such a rule would be as
likely to be inflexibly adhered to. The grounds of the rule not
being so well understood by the public, opinion would probably
not enforce it with as much rigidity, and, in any circumstances
of difficulty, would be likely to turn against it; while to the
government itself a suspension of convertibility would appear a
much stronger and more extreme measure, than a relaxation of what
might possibly be considered a somewhat artificial rule. There is
therefore a great preponderance of reasons in favour of a
convertible, in preference to even the best regulated
inconvertible currency. The temptation to over-issue, in certain
financial emergencies, is so strong, that nothing is admissible
which can tend, in however slight a degree, to weaken the
barriers that restrain it. 

    3. Although no doctrine in political economy rests on more
obvious grounds than the mischief of a paper currency not
maintained at the same value with a metallic, either by
convertibility, or by some principal of limitation equivalent to
it; and although, accordingly, this doctrine has, though not till
after the discussions of many years, been tolerably effectually
drummed into the public mind; yet dissentients are still
numerous, and projectors every now and then start up, with plans
for curing all the economical evils of society by means of an
unlimited issue of inconvertible paper. There is, in truth, a
great charm in the idea. To be able to pay off the national debt,
defray the expenses of government without taxation, and in fine,
to make the fortunes of the whole community, is a brilliant
prospect, when once a man is capable of believing that printing a
few characters on bits of paper will do it. The philosopher's
stone could not be expected to do more. 
    As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate,
it is not superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by
which the schemers impose upon themselves. One of the commonest
is, that a paper currency cannot be issued in excess so long aS
every note issued represents property, or has a foundation of
actual property to rest on. These phrases, of representing and
resting, seldom convey any distinct or well-defined idea: when
they do, their meaning is no more than this -- that the issuers
of the paper must have property, either of their own, or
entrusted to them, to the value of all the notes they issue:
though for what purpose does not very clearly appear; for if the
property cannot be claimed in exchange for the notes, it is
difficult to divine in what manner its mere existence can serve
to uphold their value. I presume, however, it is intended as a
guarantee that the holders would be finally reimbursed, in case
any untoward event should cause the whole concern to be wound up.
On this theory there have been many schemes for "coining the
whole land of the country into money" and the like. 
    In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with
reason, it seems to originate in confounding two entirely
distinct evils, to which a paper currency is liable. One is, the
insolvency of the issuers; which, if the paper is grounded on
their credit -- if it makes any promise of payment in cash,
either on demand or at any future time -- of course deprives the
paper of any vaLue which it derives from the promise. To this
evil paper credit is equally liable, however moderately used; and
against it, a proviso that all issues should be "founded on
property," as for instance that notes should only be issued on
the security of some valuable thing expressly pledged for their
redemption, would really be efficacious as a precaution. But the
theory takes no account of another evil, which is incident to the
notes of the most solvent firm, company, or government; that of
being depreciated in value from being issued in excessive
quantity. The assignats, during the French Revolution were an
example of a currency grounded on these principles. The assignats
"represented" an immense amount of highly valuable property,
namely the lands of the crown, the church, the monasteries, and
the emigrants; amounting possibly to half the territory of
France. They were, in fact, orders or assignments on this mass of
land. The revolutionary government had the idea of "coining"
these lands into money; but, to do them justice, they did not
originally contemplate the immense multiplication of issues to
which they were eventually driven by the failure of all other
financial resources. They imagined that the assignats would come
rapidly back to the issuers in exchange for land, and that they
should be able to reissue them continually until the lands were
all disposed of, without having at any time more than a very
moderate quantity in circulation. Their hope was frustrated: the
land did not sell so quickly as they expected; buyers were not
inclined to invest their money in possessions which were likely
to be resumed without compensation if the Revolution succumbed:
the bits of paper which represented land, becoming prodigiously
multiplied, could no more keep up their value than the land
itself would have done if it had all been brought to market at
once; and the result was that it at last required an assignat of
six hundred francs to pay for a pound of butter. 
    The example of the assignats has been said not to be
conclusive, because an assignat only represented land in general,
but not a definite quantity of land. To have prevented their
depreciation, the proper course, it is affirmed, would have been
to have made a valuation of all the confiscated property at its
metallic value, and to have issued assignats up to, but not
beyond, that limit; giving to the holders a right to demand any
piece of land, at its registered valuation, in exchange for
assignats to the same amount. There can be no question about the
superiority of this plan over the one actually adopted. Had this
course been followed, the assignats could never have been
depreciated to the inordinate degree they were; for -- as they
would have retained all their purchasing power in relation to
land, however much they might have fallen in respect to other
things -- before they had lost very much of their market value,
they would probably have been brought in to be exchanged for
land. It must be remembered, however, that their not being
depreciated would presuppose that no greater number of them
continued in circulation than would have circulated if they had
been convertible into cash. However convenient, therefore, in a
time of revolution, this currency convertible into land on demand
might have been, as a contrivance for selling rapidly a great
quantity of land with the least possible sacrifice; it is
difficult to see what advantage it would have, as the permanent
system of a country, over a currency convertible into coin: while
it is not at all difficult to see what would be its
disadvantages; since land is far more variable in value than gold
and silver; and besides, land, to most persons, being rather an
encumbrance than a desirable possession, except to be converted
into money, people would submit to a much greater depreciation
before demanding land, than they will before demanding gold or
silver.(1*) 

    4 Another of the fallacies from which the advocates of an
inconvertible currency derive support, is the notion that an
increase of the currency quickens industry. This idea was set
afloat by Hume, in his Essay on Money, and has had many devoted
adherents since; witness the Birmingham currency school, of whom
Mr. Attwood was at one time the most conspicuous representative.
Mr. Attwood maintained that a rise of prices produced by an
increase of paper currency, stimulates every producer to his
utmost exertions, and brings all the capital and labour of the
country into complete employment; and that this has invariably
happened in all periods of rising prices, when the rise was on a
sufficiently great scale. I presume, however, that the inducement
which, according to Mr Attwood, excited this unusual ardour in
all persons engaged in production, must have been the expectation
of getting more commodities generally, more real wealth, in
exchange for the produce of their labour, and not merely more
pieces of paper. This expectation, however, must have been, by
the very terms of the supposition, disappointed, since, all
prices being supposed to rise equally, no one was really better
paid for his goods than before. Those who agree with Mr. Attwood
could only succeed in winning people on to these unwonted
exertions, by a prolongation of what would in fact be a delusion;
contriving matters so, that by a progressive rise of money
prices, every producer shall always seem to be in the very act of
obtaining an increased remuneration which he never, in reality,
does obtain. It is unnecessary to advert to any other of the
objections to this plan, than that of its total impracticability.
It calculates on finding the whole world persisting for ever in
the belief that more pieces of paper are more riches, and never
discovering that, with all their paper, they cannot buy more of
anything that they could before. No such mistake was made during
any of the periods of high prices, on the experience of which
this school lays so much stress. At the periods which Mr. Attwood
mistook for times of prosperity, and which were simply (as all
periods of high prices, under a convertible currency, must be)
times of speculation, the speculators did not think they were
growing rich because the high prices would last, but because they
would not last, and because whoever contrived to realize while
they did last, would find himself, after the recoil, in
possession of a greater number of pounds sterling, without their
having become of less value. If, at the close of the speculation,
an issue of paper had been made, sufficient to keep prices up to
the point which they attained when at the highest, no one would
have been more disappointed than the speculators; since the gain
which they thought to have reaped by realizing in time (at the
expense of their competitors, who bought when they sold, and had
to sell after the revulsion) would have faded away in their
hands, and instead of it they would have got nothing except a few
more paper tickets to count by. 
    Hume's version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree
from Mr. Attwood's. He thought that all commodities would not
rise in price simultaneously, and that some persons therefore
would obtain a real gain, by getting more money for what they had
to sell, while the things which they wished to buy might not yet
have risen. And those who would reap this gain would always be
(he seems to think) the first comers. It seems obvious, however,
that for every person who thus gains more than usual, there is
necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser, if
things took place as Hume supposes, would be the seller of the
commodities which are slowest to rise; who, by the supposition,
parts with his goods at the old prices, to purchasers who have
already benefited by the new. This seller has obtained for his
commodity only the accustomed quantity of money, while there are
already some things of which that money will no longer purchase
as much as before. If, therefore, he knows what is going on, he
will raise his price, and then the buyer will not have the gain,
which is supposed to stimulate his industry. But if, on the
contrary, the seller does not know the state of the case, and
only discovers it when he finds, in laying his money out, that it
does not go so far, he then obtains less than the ordinary
remuneration for his labour and capital; and if the other
dealer's industry is encouraged, it should seem that his must,
from the opposite cause, be impaired. 

    5. There is no way in which a general and permanent rise of
prices, or in other words, depreciation of money, can benefit
anybody, except at the expense of somebody else. The substitution
of paper for metallic currency is a national gain: any further
increase of paper beyond this is but a form of robbery. 
    An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who,
until the notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of them
as if they were a real capital: and so long as the notes are no
permanent addition to the currency, but merely supersede gold or
silver to the same amount, the gain of the issuer is a loss to no
one; it is obtained by saving to the community the expense of the
more costly material. But if there is no gold or silver to be
superseded -- if the notes are added to the currency, instead of
being substituted for the metallic part of it -- all holders of
currency lose, by the depreciation of its value, the exact
equivalent of what the issuer gains. A tax is virtually levied on
them for his benefit. It will be objected by some, that gains are
also made by the producers and dealers who, by means of the
increased issue, are accommodated with loans. Theirs, however, is
not an additional gain, but a portion of that which is reaped by
the issuer at the expense of all possessors of money. The profits
arising from the contribution levied upon the public, he does not
keep to himself, but divides with his customers. But besides the
benefit reaped by the issuers, or by others through them, at the
expense of the public generally, there is another unjust gain
obtained by a larger class, namely by those who are under fixed
pecuniary obligations. All such persons are freed, by a
depreciation of the currency, from a portion of the burthen of
their debts or other engagements: in other words, part of the
property of their creditors is gratuitously transferred to them.
On a superficial view it may be imagined that this is an
advantage to industry'. since the productive classes are great
borrowers, and generally owe larger debts to the unproductive (if
we include among the latter all persons not actually in business)
than the unproductive classes owe to them; especially if the
national debt be included. It is only thus that a general rise of
prices can be a source of benefit to producers and dealers; by
diminishing the pressure of their fixed burthens. And this might
be accounted an advantage, if integrity and good faith were of no
importance to the world, and to industry and commerce in
particular. Not many, however, have been found to say that the
currency ought to be depreciated on the simple ground of its
being desirable to rob the national creditor and private
creditors of a part of what is in their bond. The schemes which
have tended that way have almost always had some appearance of
special and circumstantial justification, such as the necessity
of compensating for a prior injustice committed in the contrary
direction. 

    6. Thus in England, for many years subsequent to 1819, it was
pertinaciously contended, that a large portion of the national
debt, and a multitude of private debts still in existence, were
contracted between 1797 and 1819, when the Bank of England was
exempted from giving cash for its notes; and that it is grossly
unjust to borrowers, (that is, in the case of the national debt,
to all tax-payers) that they should be paying interest on the
same nominal sums in a currency of full value, which were
borrowed in a depreciated one. The depreciation, according to the
views and objects of the particular writer, was represented to
have averaged thirty, fifty, or even more than fifty per cent:
and the conclusion was, that either we ought to return to this
depreciated currency, or to strike off from the national debt,
and from mortgages or other private debts of old standing, a
percentage corresponding to the estimated amount of the
depreciation. 
    To this doctrine, the following was the answer usually made.
Granting that, by returning to cash payments without lowering the
standard, an injustice was done to debtors, in holding them
liable for the same amount of a currency enhanced in value, which
they had borrowed while it was depreciated; it is now too late to
make reparation for this injury. The debtors and creditors of
to-day are not the debtors and creditors of 1819: the lapse of
years has entirely altered the pecuniary relations of the
community., and it being impossible now to ascertain the
particular persons who were either benefited or injured, to
attempt to retrace our steps would not be redressing a wrong, but
superadding a second act of wide-spread injustice to the one
already committed. This argument is certainly conclusive on the
practical question; but it places the honest conclusion on too
narrow and too low a ground. It concedes that the measure of
1819, called Peel's Bill, by which cash payments were resumed at
the original standard of 3l. 17s. 10 1/2d., was really the
injustice it was said to be. This is an admission wholly opposed
to the truth. Parliament had no alternative; it was absolutely
bound to adhere to the acknowledged standard; as may be shown on
three distinct grounds, two of fact, and one of principle. 
    The reasons of fact are these. In the first place it is not
true that the debts, private or public, incurred during the Bank
restriction, were contracted in a currency of lower value than
that in which the interest is now paid. It is indeed true that
the suspension of the obligation to pay in specie, did put it in
the power of the Bank to depreciate the currency. It is true also
that the Bank really exercised that power, though to a far less
extent than is often pretended; since the difference between the
market price of gold and the Mint valuation, during the greater
part of the interval, was very trifling, and when it was
greatest, during the last five years of the war, did not much
exceed thirty per cent. To the extent of that difference, the
currency was depreciated, that is, its value was below that of
the standard to which it professed to adhere. But the state of
Europe at that time was such -- there was so unusual an
absorption of the precious metals, by hoarding, and in the
military chests of the vast armies which then desolated the
Continent, that the value of the standard itself was very
considerably raised: and the best authorities, among whom it is
sufficient to name Mr Tooke, have, after an elaborate
investigation, satisfied themselves that the difference between
paper and bullion was not greater than the enhancement in value
of gold itself, and that the paper, though depreciated relatively
to the then value of gold, did not sink below the ordinary value,
at other times, either of gold or of a convertible paper. If this
be true (and the evidences of the fact are conclusively stated in
Mr. Tooke's History of Prices) the foundation of the whole case
against the fundholder and other creditors on the ground of
depreciation is subverted. 
    But, secondly, even if the currency had really been lowered
in value at each period of the Bank restriction, in the same
degree in which it was depreciated in relation to its standard,
we must remember that a part only of the national debt, or of
other permanent engagements, was incurred during the Bank
restriction. A large part had been contracted before 1797; a
still larger during the early years of the restriction, when the
difference between paper and gold was yet small. To the holders
of the former part, an injury was done, by paying the interest
for twenty-two years in a depreciated currency: those of the
second, suffered an injury during the years in which the interest
was paid in a currency more depreciated than that in which the
loans were contracted. To have resumed cash payments at a lower
standard would have been to perpetuate the injury to these two
classes of creditors, in order to avoid giving an undue benefit
to a third class, who had lent their money during the few years
of greatest depreciation. As it is, there was an underpayment to
one set of persons, and an overpayment to another. The late Mr.
Mushet took the trouble to make an arithmetical comparison
between the two amounts. He ascertained by calculation, that if
an account had been made out in 1819, of what the fundholders had
gained and lost by the variation of the paper currency from its
standard, they would have been found as a body to have been
losers; so that if any compensation was due on the ground of
depreciation, it would not be from the fundholders collectively,
but to them. 
    Thus it is with the facts of the case. But these reasons of
fact are not the strongest. There is a reason of principle, still
more powerful. Suppose that, not a part of the debt merely, but
the whole, had been contracted in a depreciated currency,
depreciated not only in comparison with its standard, but with
its own value before and after; and that we were now paying the
interest of this debt in a currency fifty or even a hundred per
cent more valuable than that in which it was contracted. What
difference would this make in the obligation of paying it, if the
condition that it should be so paid was part of the original
compact? Now this is not only truth, but less than the truth. The
compact stipulated better terms for the fundholder than he has
received. During the whole continuance of the Bank restriction,
there was a parliamentary pledge, by which the legislature was as
much bound as any legislature is capable of binding itself, that
cash payments should be resumed on the original footing, at
farthest in six months after the conclusion of a general peace.
This was therefore an actual condition of every loan; and the
terms of the loan were more favourable in consideration of it.
Without some such stipulation, the Government could not have
expected to borrow, unless on the terms on which loans are made
to the native princes of India. If it had been understood and
avowed that, after borrowing the money, the standard at which it
was commuted might be permanently lowered, to any extent which to
the "collective wisdom" of a legislature of borrowers might seem
fit -- who can say what rate of interest would have been a
sufficient inducement to persons of common sense to risk their
savings in such an adventure? However much the fundholders had
gained by the resumption of cash payments, the terms of the
contract insured their giving ample value for it. They gave value
for more than they received; since cash payments were not resumed
in six months, but in as many years, after the peace. So that
waving all our arguments except the last, and conceding all the
facts asserted on the other side of the question, the
fundholders, instead of being unduly benefited, are the injured
party; and would have a claim to compensation, if such claims
were not very properly barred by the impossibility of
adjudication, and by the salutary general maxim of law and
policy, "quod interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium." 

NOTES:

1. Among the schemes of currency to which, strange to say,
intelligent writers have been found to give their sanction, one
is as follows: that the state should receive in pledge or
mortgage, any kind or amount of property, such as land, stock,
&c., and should advance to the owners inconvertible paper money
to the estimated value. Such a currency would not even have the
recommendations of the imaginary assignats supposed in the text:
since those into whose hands the notes were paid by the persons
who received them, could not return them to the Government, and
demand in exchange land or stock which was only pledged, not
alienated. There would be no reflux of such assignats as these,
and their depreciation would be indefinite. 

