The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 6

Summary of the Theory of Value


    1. We have now attained a favourable point for looking back,
and taking a simultaneous view of the space which we have
traversed since the commencement of the present Book. The
following are the principles of the theory of Value, so far as we
have yet ascertained them. 
    I. Value is a relative term. The value of a thing means the
quantity of some other thing, or of things in general, which it
exchanges for. The values of all things can never, therefore,
rise or fall simultaneously. There is no such thing as a general
rise or a general fall of values. Every rise of value supposes a
fall, and every fall a rise. 
    II. The temporary or market value of a thing, depends on the
demand and supply; rising as the demand rises, and falling as the
supply rises. The demand, however, varies with the value, being
generally greater when the thing is cheap than when it is dear;
and the value always adjusts itself in such a manner, that the
demand is equal to the supply. 
    III. Besides their temporary value, things have also a
permanent, or as it may be called, a Natural Value, to which the
market value, after every variation, always tends to return; and
the oscillations compensate for one another, so that, on the
average, commodities exchange at about their natural value. 
    IV. The natural value of some things is a scarcity value; but
most things naturally exchange for one another in the ratio of
their cost of production, or at what may be termed their Cost
Value. 
    V. The things which are naturally and permanently at a
scarcity value, are those of which the supply cannot be increased
at all, or not sufficiently to satisfy the whole of the demand
which would exist for them at their cost value. 
    VI. A monopoly value means a scarcity value. Monopoly cannot
give a value to anything except through a limitation of the
supply. 
    VII. Every commodity of which the supply can be indefinitely
increased by labour and capital, exchanges for other things
proportionally to the cost necessary for producing and bringing
to market the most costly portion of the supply required. The
natural value is synonymous with the Cost Value, and the cost
value of a thing, means the cost value of the most costly portion
of it. 
    VIII. Cost of Production consists of several elements, some
of which are constant and universal, others occasional. The
universal elements of cost of production are, the wages of the
labour, and the profits of the capital. The occasional elements
are taxes, and any extra cost occasioned by a scarcity value of
some of the requisites. 
    IX. Rent is not an element in the cost of production of the
commodity which yields it; except in the cases (rather
conceivable than actually existing) in which it results from, and
represents, a scarcity value. But when land capable of yielding
rent in agriculture is applied to some other purpose, the rent
which it would have yielded is an element in the cost of
production of the commodity which it is employed to produce. 
    X. Omitting the occasional elements; things which admit of
indefinite increase, naturally and permanently exchange for each
other according to the comparative amount of wages which must be
paid for producing them, and the comparative amount of profits
which must be obtained by the capitalists who pay those wages. 
    XI. The comparative amount of wages does not depend on what
wages are in themselves. High wages do not make high values, nor
low wages low values. The comparative amount of wages depends
partly on the comparative quantities of labour required, and
partly on the comparative rates of its remuneration. 
    XII. So, the comparative rate of profits does not depend on
what profits are in themselves; nor do high or low profits make
high or low values. It depends partly on the comparative lengths
of time during which the capital is employed, and partly on the
comparative rate of profits in different employments. 
    XIII. If two things are made by the same quantity of labour,
and that labour paid at the same rate, and if the wages of the
labourer have to be advanced for the same space of time, and the
nature of the employment does not require that there be a
permanent difference in their rate of profit; then, whether wages
and profits be high or low, and whether the quantity of labour
expended be much or little, these two things will, on the
average, exchange for one another. 
    XIV. If one of two things commands, on the average, a greater
value than the other, the cause must be that it requires for its
production either a greater quantity of labour, or a kind of
labour permanently paid at a higher rate; or that the capital, or
part of the capital, which suPports that labour, must be advanced
for a longer period; or lastly, that the production is attended
with some circumstance which requires to be compensated by a
permanently higher rate of profit. 
    XV. Of these elements, the quantity of labour required for
the production is the most important: the effect of the others is
smaller, though none of them are insignificant. 
    XVI. The lower profits are, the less important become the
minor elements of cost of production, and the less do commodities
deviate from a value proportioned to the quantity and quality of
the labour required for their production. 
    XVII. But every fall of profits lowers, in some degree, the
cost value of things made with much or durable machinery, and
raises that of things made by hand; and every rise of profits
does the reverse. 

    2. Such is the general theory of Exchange Value. It is
necessary, however, to remark that this theory contemplates a
system of production carried on by capitalists for profit, and
not by labourers for subsistence. In proportion as we admit this
last supposition -- and in most counties we must admit it, at
least in respect of agricultural produce, to a very great
extent-such of the preceding theorems as relate to the dependence
of value on cost of production will require modification. Those
theorems are all grounded on the supposition, that the producer's
object and aim is to derive a profit from his capital. This
canted, it follows that he must sell his commodity at the price
which will afford the ordinary rate of profit, that is to say, it
must exchange for other commodities at its cost value. But the
peasant proprietor, the metayer, and even the peasant-farmer or
allotment-holder -- the labourer, under whatever name, producing
on his own account-is seeking, not an investment for his little
capital, but an advantageous employment for his time and labour.
His disbursements, beyond his own maintenance and that of his
family, are so small, that nearly the whole proceeds of the sale
of the produce are wages of labour. When he and his family have
been fed from the produce of the farm (and perhaps clothed with
materials grown thereon, and manufactured in the family) he may,
in respect of the supplementary remuneration derived from the
sale of the surplus produce, be compared to those labourers who,
deriving their subsistence from an independent source, can afford
to sell their labour at any price which is to their minds worth
the exertion. A peasant, who supports himself and his family with
one portion of his produce, will often sell the reminder very
much below what would be its cost value to the capitalist. 
    There is, however, even in this case, a minimum, or inferior
limit, of value. The produce which he carries to market, must
bring in to him the value of all necessaries which he is
compelled to purchase; and it must enable him to pay his rent.
Rent, under peasant cultivation, is not governed by the
principles set forth in the chapters immediately preceding, but
is either determined by custom, as in the case of metayers, or,
if fixed by competition, depends on the ratio of population to
land. Rent, therefore, in this case, is an element of cost of
production. The peasant must work until he has cleared his rent
and the price of all purchased necessaries. After this, he will
go on working only if he can sell the produce for such a price as
will overcome his aversion to labour. 
    The minimum just mentioned is what the peasant must obtain in
exchange for the whole of his surplus produce. But inasmuch as
this surplus is not a fixed quantity, but may be either greater
or less according to the degree of his industry, a minimum value
for the whole of it does not give any minimum value for a
definite quantity of the commodity. In this state of things,
therefore, it can hardly be sid, that the value depends at all on
cost of production. It depends entirely on demand and supply,
that is, on the proportion between the quantity of surplus food
which the peasants choose to produce, and the numbers of the
non-agricultural, or rather of the non-peasant population. If the
buying class were numerous and the growing class lazy, food might
be permanently at a scarcity price. I am not aware that this case
has anywhere a real existence. If the growing class is energetic
and industrious, and the buyers few, food will be extremely
cheap. This also is a rare case, though some parts of France
perhaps approximate to it. The common cases are, either that, as
in Ireland until lately, the peasant class is indolent and the
buyers few, or the peasants industrious and the town population
numerous and opulent, as in Belgium, the north of Italy, and
parts of Germany. The price of the produce will adjust itself to
these varieties of circumstances, unless modified, as in many
cases it is, by the competition of producers who are not
peasants, or by the prices of foreign markets. 

    3. Another anomalous case is that of slave-grown produce:
which presents, however, by no means the same degree of
complication. The slave-owner is a capitalist, and his inducement
to production consists in a profit on his capital. This profit
must amount to the ordinary rate. In respect to his expenses, he
is in the same position as if his slaves were free labourers
working with their present efficiency, and were hired with wages
equal to their present cost. If the cost is less in proportion to
the work done, than the wages of free labour would be, so much
the greater are his profits: but if all other producers in the
country possess the same advantage, the values of commodities
will not be at all affected by it. The only case in which they
can be affected, is when the privilege of cheap labour is
confined to particular branches of production, free labourers at
proportionally higher wages being employed in the remainder. In
this case, as in all cases of permanent inequality between the
wages of different employments, prices and values receive the
impress of the inequality. Slave-grown will exchange for
non-slave-grown commodities in a less ratio than that of the
quantity of labour required for their production; the value of
the former will be less, of the latter greater, than if slavery
did not exist. 
    The further adaptation of the theory of value to the
varieties of existing or possible industrial systems may be left
with great advantage to the intelligent reader. It is well said
by Montesquieu, "Il ne faut pas toujours tellement epuiser un
sujet, qu'on ne laisse rien a faire au lecteur. Il ne s'agit pas
de faire lire, mais de faire penser." (1*)

NOTES:

1. Esprit des Lois, xi, ad finem.

