The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3: Distribution

Chapter 25

Of the Competition of Different Countries in the Same Market

    1. In the phraseology of the Mercantile System, the language
and doctrines of which are still the basis of what may be called
the political economy of the selling classes, as distinguished
from the buyers or consumers, there is no word of more frequent
recurrence or more perilous import than the word underselling. To
undersell other countries -- not to be undersold by other
countries -- were spoken of, and are still very often spoken of,
almost as if they were the sole purposes for which production and
commodities exist. The feelings of rival tradesmen, prevailing
among nations, overruled for centuries all sense of the general
community of advantage which commercial countries derive from the
prosperity of one another: and that commercial spirit which is
now one of the strongest obstacles to wars, was during a certain
period of European history their principal cause. 
    Even in the more enlightened view now attainable of the
nature and consequences of international commerce, some, though a
comparatively small, space must still be made for the fact of
commercial rivality. Nations may, like individual dealers, be
competitors, with opposite interests, in the markets of some
commodities, while in others they are in the more fortunate
relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of commerce does
not consist, as it was once thought to do, in the commodities
sold; but, since the commodities sold are the means of obtaining
those which are bought, a nation would be cut off from the real
advantage of commerce, the imports, if it could not induce other
nations to take any of its commodities in exchange; and in
proportion as the competition of other counties compels it to
offer its commodities on cheaper terms, on pain of not selling
them at all, the imports which it obtains by its foreign trade
are procured at greater cost. 
    These points have been adequately, though incidentally,
frustrated in some of the preceding chapters. But the great space
which the topic has filled, and continues to fill, in economical
speculations, and in the practical anxieties both of politicians
and of dealers and manufacturers, makes it desirable, before
quitting the subject of international exchange, to subjoin a few
observations on the things which do, and on those which do not,
enable countries to undersell one another. 
    One country can only undersell another in a given market, to
the extent of entirely expelling her from it, on two conditions.
In the first place, she must have a greater advantage than the
second country in the production of the article exported by both;
meaning by a greater advantage (as has been already so fully
explained) not absolutely, but in comparison with other
commodities; and in the second place, such must be her relation
with the customer country in respect to the demand for each
other's products, and such the consequent state of international
values, as to give away to the customer country more than the
whole advantage possessed by the rival country; otherwise the
rival will still be able to hold her ground in the market. 
    Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis of a trade between
England and Germany in cloth and linen: England being capable of
producing 10 yards of cloth at the same cost with 15 yards of
linen, Germany at the same cost with 20, and the two commodities
being exchanged between the two countries (cost of carriage
apart) at some intermediate rate, say 10 for 17. Germany could
not be permanently undersold in the English market, and expelled
from it, unless by a country which offered not merely more than
17, but more than 20 yards of linen for 10 of cloth. Short of
that, the competition would only oblige Germany to pay dearer for
cloth, but would not disable her from exporting linen. The
country, therefore, which could undersell Germany, must, in the
first place, be able to produce linen at less cost, compared with
cloth, than Germany herself; and in the next place, must have
such a demand for cloth, or other English commodities, as would
compel her, even when she became sole occupant of the market, to
give a greater advantage to England than Germany could give by
resigning the whole of hers; to give, for example, 21 yards for
10. For if not -- if, for example, the equation of international
demand, after Germany was excluded, gave a ratio of 18 for 10,
Germany could again enter into the competition; Germany would be
now the underselling nation; and there would be a point, perhaps
19 for 10, at which both countries would be able to maintain
their ground, and to sell in England enough linen to pay for the
cloth, or other English commodities, for which, on these
newly-adjusted terms of interchange, they had a demand. In like
manner, England, as an exporter of cloth, could only be driven
from the German market by some rival whose superior advantages in
the production of cloth enabled her, and the intensity of whose
demand for German produce compelled her, to offer 10 yards of
cloth, not merely for less than 17 yards of linen, but for less
than 15. In that case, England could no longer carry on the trade
without loss; but in any case short of this, she would merely be
obliged to give to Germany more cloth for less linen than she had
previously given. 
    It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently undersold
may be taken much too easily; may be taken when the thing really
to be anticipated is not the loss of the trade, but the minor
inconvenience of carrying it on at a diminished advantage; an
inconvenience chiefly falling on the consumers of foreign
commodities, and not on the producers or sellers of the exported
article. It is no sufficient ground of apprehension to the
English producers, to find that some other country can sell cloth
in foreign markets at some particular time, a trifle cheaper than
they can themselves afford to do in the existing state of prices
in England. Suppose them to be temporarily undersold, and their
exports diminished; the imports will exceed the exports, there
will be a new distribution of the precious metals, prices will
fall, and as all the money expenses of the English producers will
be diminished, they will be able (if the case falls short of that
stated in the preceding paragraph) again to compete with their
rivals. The loss which England will incur, will not fall upon the
exporters, but upon those who consume imported commodities; who,
with money incomes reduced in amount, will have to pay the same
or even an increased price for all things produced in foreign
countries. 

    2. Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale, of
underselling. It will be observed that it takes no account of
some things which we hear spoken of, oftener perhaps than any
others, in the character of causes exposing a country to be
undersold. 
    According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be
undersold in any commodity, unless the rival country has a
stronger inducement than itself for devoting its labour and
capital to the production of the commodity; arising from the fact
that by doing so it occasions a greater saving of labour and
capital, to be shared between itself and its customers -- a
greater increase of the aggregate produce of the world. The
underselling, therefore, though a loss to the undersold country,
is an advantage to the world at large; the substituted commerce
being one which economies more of the labour and capital of
mankind, and adds more to their collective wealth, than the
commerce superseded by it. The advantage, of course, consists in
being able to produce the commodity of better quality, or with
less labour (compared with other things); or perhaps not with
less labour, but in less time; with a less prolonged detention of
the capital employed. This may arise from greater natural
advantages (such as soil, climate, richness of mines); superior
capability, either natural or acquired, in the labourers; better
division of labour, and better tools, or machinery. But there is
no place left in this theory for the case of lower wages. This,
however, in the theories commonly current, is a favourite cause
of underselling. We continually hear of the disadvantage under
which the British producer labours, both in foreign markets and
even in his own, through the lower wages paid by his foreign
rivals. These lower wages, we are told, enable, or are always on
the point of enabling them to sell at lower prices, and to
dislodge the English manufacturer from all markets in which he is
not artificially protected. 
    Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle, it is
worth while to bestow a moment's consideration upon it as a
question of fact. Is it true, that the wages of manufacturing
labour are lower in foreign countries than in England, in any
sense in which low wages are an advantage to the capitalist? The
artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn less wages in a day, but does
he not do less work? Degrees of efficiency considered, does his
labour cost less to his employer? Though wages may be lower on
the Continent, is not the Cost of Labour, which is the real
element in the competition, very nearly the same? That it is so
seems the opinion of competent judges, and is confirmed by the
very little difference in the rate of profit between England and
the Continental countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd that
English producers can be undersold by their Continental rivals
from this cause. It is only in America that the supposition is
prima facie admissible. In America, wages are much higher than in
England, if we mean by wages the daily earnings of a labourer:
but the productive power of American labour is so great -- its
efficiency, combined with the favourable circumstances in which
it is exerted, makes it worth so much to the purchaser, that the
Cost of Labour is lower in America than in England; as is
indicated by the fact that the general rate of profits and of
interest is higher. 

    3. But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of low
Cost of Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the foreign
market? I mean, of course, low wages which are common to the
whole productive industry of the country. 
    If wages, in any of the departments of industry which supply
exports, are kept, artificially, or by some accidental cause,
below the general rate of wages in the country, this is a real
advantage in the foreign market. It lessens the comparative cost
of production of those articles, in relation to others; and has
the same effect as if their production required so much less
labour. Take, for instance, the case of the United States in
respect to certain commodities, prior to the civil war. Tobacco
and cotton, two great articles of export, were produced by slave
labour, while food and manufactures generally were produced by
free labourers, neither working on their own account or paid by
wages. In spite of the inferior efficiency of slave labour, there
can be no reasonable doubt that in a country where the wages of
free labour were so high, the work executed by slaves was a
better bargain to the capitalist. To whatever extent it was so,
this smaller cost of labour, being not general, but limited to
those employments, was just as much a cause of cheapness in the
products, both in the home and in the foreign market, as if they
had been made by a less quantity of labour. If, when the slaves
in the Southern States were emancipated, their wages rose to the
general level of the earnings of free labour in America, that
country might have been obliged to erase some of the slave-grown
articles from the catalogue of its exports, and would certainly
be unable to sell any of them in the foreign market at the
accustomed price. Accordingly, American cotton is now habitually
at a much higher price than before the war. Its previous
cheapness was partly an artificial cheapness, which may be
compared to that produced by a bounty on production or on
exportation: or, considering the means by which it was obtained,
an apter comparison would be with the cheapness of stolen goods. 
    An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very
different moral character, is that possessed by domestic
manufactures; fabrics produced in the leisure hours of families
partially occupied in other pursuits, who, not depending for
subsistence on the produce of the manufacture, can afford to sell
it at any price, however low, for which they think it worth while
to take the trouble of producing. In an account of the Canton of
Zurich, to which I have had occasion to refer on another subject,
it is observed,(1*) "The workman of Zurich is to-day a
manufacturer, to-morrow again an agriculturist, and changes his
occupations with the seasons, in a continual round. Manufacturing
industry and tillage advance hand in hand, in inseparable
alliance, and in this union of the two occupations the secret may
be found, why the simple and unlearned Swiss manufacturer can
always go on competing, and increasing in prosperity, in the face
of those extensive establishments fitted out with great economic,
and (what is still more important) intellectual, resources. Even
in those parts of the Canton where manufactures have extended
themselves the most widely, only one-seventh of all the families
belong to manufactures alone; four-sevenths combine that
employment with agriculture. The advantage of this domestic or
family manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that it is
compatible with all other avocations, or rather that it may in
part be regarded as only a supplementary employment. In winter in
the dwellings of the operatives, the whole family employ
themselves in it: but as soon as spring appears, those on whom
the early field labours devolve, abandon the in-door work; many a
shuttle stands still; by degrees, as the field-work increases,
one member of the family follows another, till at last, at the
harvest, and during the so-called 'great works,' all hands seize
the implements of husbandry; but in unfavourable weather, and in
all otherwise vacant hours, the work in the cottage is resumed,
and when the ungenial season again recurs, the people return in
the same gradual order to their home occupation, until they have
all resumed it."
    In the case of these domestic manufactures, the comparative
cost of production, on which the interchange between countries
depends, is much lower than in proportion to the quantity of
labour employed. The workpeople, looking to the earnings of their
loom for a part only, if for any part, of their actual
maintenance, can afford to work for a less remuneration than the
lowest rate of wages which can permanently exist in the
employments by which the labourer has to support the whole
expense of a family. Working, as they do, not for an employer but
for themselves, they may be said to carry on the manufacture at
no cost at all, except the small expense of a loom and of the
material; and the limit of possible cheapness is not the
necessity of living by their trade but that of earning enough by
the work to make that social employment of their leisure hours
not disagreeable. 

    4. These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic
manufactures, exemplify the conditions under which low wages
enable a country to sell its commodities cheaper in foreign
markets, and consequently to undersell its rivals, or to avoid
being undersold by them. But no such advantage is conferred by
low wages when common to all branches of industry. General low
wages never caused any country to undersell its rivals, nor did
general high wages ever hinder it from doing so.
    To demonstrate this, we must return to an elementary
principle which was discussed in a former chapter.(2*) General
low wages do not cause low prices, nor high wages high prices,
within the country itself. General prices are not raised by a
rise of wages, any more than they would be raised by an increase
of the quantity of labour required in all production. Expenses
which affect all commodities equally, have no influence on
prices. If the maker of broadcloth or cutlery, and nobody else,
had to pay higher wages, the price of his commodity would rise,
just as it would if he had to employ more labour; because
otherwise he would gain less profit than other producers, and
nobody would engage in the employment. But if everybody has to
pay higher wages, or everybody to employ more labour, the loss
must be submitted to; as it affects everybody alike, no one can
hope to get rid of it by a change of employment, each therefore
resigns himself to a diminution of profits, and prices remain as
they were. In like manner, general low wages, or a general
increase in the productiveness of labour, does not make prices
low, but profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the
cost of labour,) why, on that account, should the producer lower
his price? He will be forced, it may be said, by the competition
of other capitalists who will crowd into his employment. But
other capitalists are also paying lower wages, and by entering
into competition with him they would gain nothing but what they
are gaining already. The rate then at which labour is paid, as
well as the quantity of it which is employed, affects neither the
value nor the price of the commodity produced, except in so far
as it is peculiar to that commodity, and not common to
commodities generally. 
    Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the country
itself, so neither do they cause it to offer its commodities in
foreign markets at a lower price. It is quite true that if the
cost of labour is lower in America than in England, America could
sell her cottons to Cuba at a lower price than England, and still
gain as high a profit as the English manufacturer. But it is not
with the profit of the English manufacturer that the American
cotton spinner will make his comparison; it is with the profits
of other American capitalists. These enjoy, in common with
himself, the benefit of a low cost of labour, and have
accordingly a high rate of profit. This high profit the cotton
spinner must also have: he will not content himself with the
English profit. It is true he may go on for a time at that lower
rate, rather than change his employment; and a trade may be
carried on, sometimes for a long period, at a much lower profit
than that for which it would have been originally engaged in.
Countries which have a low cost of labour, and high profits, do
not for that reason undersell others, but they do oppose a more
obstinate resistance to being undersold, because the producers
can often submit to a diminution of profit without being unable
to live, and even to thrive, by their business. But this is all
which their advantage does for them: and in this resistance they
will not long persevere, when a change of times which may give
them equal profits with the rest of their countrymen has become
manifestly hopeless. 

    5. There is a class of trading and exporting communities, on
which a few words of explanation seem to be required. These are
hardly to be looked upon as countries, carrying on an exchange of
commodities with other countries, but more properly as outlying
agricultural or manufacturing establishments belonging to a
larger community. Our West india colonies, for example, cannot be
regarded as countries, with a productive capital of their own. If
Manchester, instead of being where it is, were on a rock in the
North Sea, (its present industry nevertheless continuing,) it
would still be but a town of England, not a country trading with
England; it would be merely, as now, a place where England finds
it convenient to carry on her cotton manufacture. The West
Indies, in like manner, are the place where England finds it
convenient to carry on the production of sugar, coffee, and a few
other tropical commodities. All the capital employed is English
capital; almost all the industry is carried on for English uses;
there is little production of anything except the staple
commodities, and these are sent to England, not to be exchanged
for things exported to the colony and consumed by its
inhabitants, but to be sold in England for the benefit of the
proprietors there. The trade with the West Indies is therefore
hardly to be considered as external trade, but more resembles the
traffic between town and country, and is amenable to the
principles of the home trade. The rate of profit in the colonies
will be regulated by English profits; the expectation of profit
must be about the same as in England, with the addition of
compensation for the disadvantages attending the more distant and
hazardous employment: and after allowance is made for those
disadvantages, the value and price of West India produce in the
English market must be regulated, (or rather must have been
regulated formerly,) like that of any English commodity, by the
cost of production. For the last twelve or fifteen years this
principle has been in abeyance: the price was first kept up
beyond the ratio of the cost of production by deficient supplies,
which could not, owing to the deficiency of labour, be increased;
and more recently the admission of foreign competition has
introduced another element, and some of the West India Islands
are undersold, not so much because wages are higher than in Cuba
and Brazil, as because they are higher than in England: for were
they not so, Jamaica could sell her sugars at Cuban prices, and
still obtain, though not a Cuban, an English rate of profit. 
    It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but
in this case mostly independent communities, which have supported
and enriched themselves almost without any productions of their
own, (except ships and marine equipments,) by a mere carrying
trade, and commerce of entrepot; by buying the produce of one
country, to sell it at a profit in another. Such were Venice and
the Hanse Towns. The case of these communities is very simple.
They made themselves and their capital the instruments, not of
production, but of accomplishing exchanges between the
productions of other countries. These exchanges are attended with
an advantage to those countries -- an increase of the aggregate
returns to industry -- part of which went to indemnify the agents
for the necessary expenses of transport, and another part to
remunerate the use of their capital and mercantile skill. The
countries themselves had not capital disposable for the
operation. When the Venetians became the agents of the general
commerce of Southern Europe, they had scarcely any competitors:
the thing would not have been done at all without them, and there
was really no limit to their profits except the limit to what the
ignorant feudal nobility could and would give for the unknown
luxuries then first presented to their sight. At a later period
competition arose, and the profit of this operation, like that of
others, became amenable to natural laws. The carrying trade was
taken up by Holland, a country with productions of its own and a
large accumulated capital. The other nations of Europe also had
now capital to spare, and were capable of conducting their
foreign trade for themselves: but Holland, having, from a variety
of circumstances, a lower rate of profit at home, could afford to
carry for other countries at a smaller advance on the original
cost of the goods, than would have been required by their own
capitalists; and Holland, therefore, engrossed the greatest part
of the carrying trade of all those countries which did not keep
it to themselves by Navigation Laws, constructed, like those of
England, for that express purpose. 

NOTES:

1. Historisch- geographisch- staatistisches Germalde der Schweiz.
Erstes Heft, 1834, p. 105.

2. Supra, book iii. ch. iv.

