The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 3, Distribution

Chapter 2

Of Demand and Supply in Their Relation to Value

    1. That a thing may have any value in exchange, two
conditions are necessary. It must be of some use; that is (as
already explained) it must conduce to some purpose, satisfy some
desire. No one will pay a price, or part with anything which
serves some of his purposes, to obtain a thing which serves none
of them. But, secondly, the thing must not only have some
utility, there must also be some difficulty in its attainment.
"Any article whatever," says Mr De Quincey,(1*) "to obtain that
artificial sort of value which is meant by exchange value, must
begin by offering itself as a means to some desirable purpose;
and secondly, even though possessing incontestably this
preliminary advantage, it will never ascend to an exchange value
in cases where it can be obtained gratuitously and without
effort; of which last terms both are necessary as limitations.
For often it will happen that some desirable object may be
obtained gratuitously; stoop, and you gather it at your feet; but
still, because the continued iteration of this stooping exacts a
laborious effort, very soon it is found, that to gather for
yourself virtually is not gratuitous. In the vast forests of the
Canadas, at intervals, wild strawberries may be gratuitously
gathered by shiploads: yet such is the exhaustion of a stooping
posture, and of a labour so monotonous, that everybody is soon
glad to resign the service into mercenary hands."
    As was pointed out in the last chapter, the utility of a
thing in the estimation of the purchaser, is the extreme limit of
its exchange value: higher the value cannot ascend; peculiar
circumstances are required to raise it so high. This topic is
happily illustrated by Mr. De Quincey. "Walk into almost any
possible shop, buy the first article you see; what will determine
its price? In the ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, simply the
element D -- difficulty of attainment. The other element U, or
intrinsic utility, will be perfectly inoperative. Let the thing
(measured by its uses) be, for your Purposes, worth ten guineas,
so that you would rather give ten guineas than lose it; yet, if
the difficulty of producing it be only worth one guinea, one
guinea is the price which it will bear. But still not the less,
though U is inoperative, can U be supposed absent? By no
possibility; for, if it had been absent, assuredly you would not
have bought the article even at the lowest price. U acts upon
you, though it does not act upon the price. On the other hand, in
the hundredth case, we will suppose the circumstances reversed:
you are on Lake Superior in a steam-boat, making your way to an
unsettled region 800 miles a-head of civilization, and
consciously with no chance at all of purchasing any luxury
whatsoever, little luxury or big luxury, for the space of ten
years to come. One fellow-passenger, whom you will part with
before sunset, has a powerful musical snuff-box; knowing by
experience the power of such a toy over your own feelings, the
magic with which at times it lulls your agitations of mind, you
are vehemently desirous to purchase it. In the hour of leaving
London you had forgot to do so; here is a final chance. But the
owner, aware of your situation not less than yourself, is
determined to operate by a strain pushed to the very uttermost
upon U, upon the intrinsic worth of the article in your
individual estimate for your individual purposes. He will not
hear of D as any controlling power or mitigating agency in the
case; and finally, although at six guineas a-piece in London or
Paris you might have loaded a waggon with such boxes, you pay
sixty rather than lose it when the last knell of the clock has
sounded, which summons you to buy now or to forfeit for ever.
Here, as before, only one element is operative; before it was D,
now it is U. But after all, D was not absent, though inoperative.
The inertness of D allowed U to put forth its total effect. The
practical compression of D being withdrawn, U springs up like
water in a pump when released from the pressure of air. Yet still
that D was present to your thoughts, though the price was
otherwise regulated, is evident; both because U and D must
coexist in order to found any case of exchange value whatever,
and because undeniably you take into very particular
consideration this D, the extreme difficulty of attainment (which
here is the greatest possible, viz. an impossibility) before you
consent to have the price racked up to U. The special D has
vanished; but it is replaced in your thoughts by an unlimited D.
Undoubtedly you have submitted to U in extremity as the
regulating force of the price; but it was under a sense of D's
latent presence. Yet D is so far from exerting any positive
force, that the retirement of D from all agency whatever on the
price-this it is which creates as it were a perfect vacuum, and
through that vacuum U rushes up to its highest and ultimate
gradation." 
    This case, in which the value is wholly related by the
necessities or desires of the purchaser, is the case of strict
and absolute monopoly; in which, the article desired being only
obtainable from one person, he can exact any equivalent, short of
the point at which no purchaser could be found. But it is not a
necessary consequence, even of complete monopoly, that the value
should be forced up to this ultimate limit; as will be seen when
we have considered the law of value in so far as depending on the
other element, difficulty of attainment. 

    2. The difficulty of attainment which determines value, is
not always the same kind of difficulty. It sometimes consists in
an absolute limitation of the supply. There are things of which
it is physically impossible to increase the quantity beyond
certain narrow limits. Such are those wines which can be grown
only in peculiar circumstances of soil, climate, and exposure.
Such also are ancient sculptures; pictures by old masters; rare
books or coins, or other articles of antiquarian curiosity. Among
such may also be reckoned houses and building-ground, in a town
of definite extent (such as Venice, or any fortified town where
fortifications are necessary to security); the most desirable
sites in any town whatever; houses and parks peculiarly favoured
by natural beauty, in places where that advantage is uncommon.
Potentially, all land whatever is a commodity of this class; and
might be practically so, in countries fully occupied and
cultivated. 
    But there is another category (embracing the majority of all
things that are bought and sold), in which the obstacle to
attainment consists only in the labour and expense requisite to
produce the commodity. Without a certain labour and expense it
cannot be had: but when any one is willing to incur these, there
needs be no limit to the multiplication of the product. If there
were labourers enough and machinery enough, cottons, woollens, or
linens might be produced by thousands of yards for every single
yard now manufactured. There would be a point, no doubt, where
further increase would be stopped by the incapacity of the earth
to afford more of the material. But there is no need, for any
purpose of political economy, to contemplate a time when this
ideal limit could become a practical one. 
    There is a third case, intermediate between the two
preceding, and rather more complex, which I shall at present
merely indicate, but the importance of which in political economy
is extremely great. There are commodities which can be multiplied
to an indefinite extent by labour and expenditure, but not by a
fixed amount of labour and expenditure. Only a limited quantity
can be produced at a given cost: if more is wanted, it must be
produced at a greater cost. To this class, as has been often
repeated, agricultural produce belongs; and generally all the
rude produce of the earth; and this peculiarity is a source of
very important consequences; one of which is the necessity of a
limit to population; and another, the payment of rent.

    3. These being the three classes, in one or other of which
all things that are bought and sold must take their place, we
shall consider them in their order. And first, of things
absolutely limited in quantity, such as ancient sculptures or
pictures.
    Of such things it is commonly said, that their value depends
upon their scarcity: but the expression is not sufficiently
definite to serve our purpose. Others say, with somewhat greater
precision, that the value depends on the demand and the supply.
But even this statement requires much explanation, to make it a
clear exponent of the relation between the value of a thing, and
the causes of which that value is an effect. 
    The supply of a commodity is an intelligible expression: it
means the quantity offered for sale; the quantity that is to be
had, at a given time and place, by those who wish to purchase it.
But what is meant by the demand? Not the mere desire for the
commodity. A beggar may desire a diamond; but his desire, however
great, will have no influence on the price. Writers have
therefore given a more limited sense to demand, and have defined
it, the wish to possess, combined with the power of purchasing.
To distinguish demand in this technical sense, from the demand
which is synonymous with desire, they call the former effectual
demand.(2*) After this explanation, it is usually supposed that
there remains no further difficulty, and that the value depends
upon the ratio between the effectual demand, as thus defined, and
the supply. 
    These phrases, however, fail to satisfy any one who requires
clear ideas, and a perfectly precise expression of them. Some
confusion must always attach to a phrase so inappropriate as that
of a ratio between two things not of the same denomination. What
ratio can there be between a quantity and a desire, or even a
desire combined with a power? A ratio between demand and supply
is only intelligible if by demand we mean the quantity demanded,
and if the ratio intended is that between the quantity demanded
and the quantity supplied. But again, the quantity demanded is
not a fixed quantity, even at the same time and place; it varies
according to the value; if the thing is cheap, there is usually a
demand for more of it than when it is dear. The demand,
therefore, partly depends on the value. But it was before laid
down that the value depends on the demand. From this
contradiction how shall we extricate ourseLves? How solve the
paradox, of two things, each depending upon the other? 
    Though the solution of these difficulties is obvious enough,
the difficulties themselves are not fanciful; and I bring them
forward thus prominently, because I am certain that they
obscurely haunt every inquirer into the subject who has not
openly faced and distinctly realized them. Undoubtedly the true
solution must have been frequently given, though I cannot call to
mind any one who had given it before myself, except the eminently
clear thinker and skilful expositor, J.B. Say. I should have
imagined, however, that it must be familiar to all political
economists, if the writings of several did not give evidence of
some want of clearness on the point, and if the instance of Mr.
De Quincey did not prove that the complete non-recognition and
implied denial of it are compatible with great intellectual
ingenuity, and close intimacy with the subject matter. 

    4. Meaning, by the word demand, the quantity demanded, and
remembering that this is not a fixed quantity, but in general
varies according to the value, let us suppose that the demand at
some particular time exceeds the supply, that is, there are
persons ready to buy, at the market value, a greater quantity
than is offered for sale. Competition takes place on the side of
the buyers, and the value rises: but how much? in the ratio (some
may suppose) of the deficiency: if the demand exceeds the supply
by one-third, the value rises one-third. By no means: for when
the value has risen one-third, the demand may still exceed the
supply; there may, even at that higher value, be a greater
quantity wanted than is to be had; and the competition of buyers
may still continue. If the article is a necessary of life, which,
rather than resign, people are willing to pay for at any price, a
deficiency of one-third may raise the price to double, triple, or
quadruple.(3*) Or, on the contrary, the competition may cease
before the value has risen in even the proportion of the
deficiency. A rise, short of one-third, may place the article
beyond the means, or beyond the inclinations, of purchasers to
the full amount. At what point, then, will the rise be arrested?
At the point, whatever it be, which equalizes the demand and the
supply: at the price which cuts off the extra third from the
demand, or brings forward additional sellers sufficient to supply
it. When, in either of these ways, or by a combination of both,
the demand becomes equal and no more than equal to the supply,
the rise of value will stop. 
    The converse case is equally simple. instead of a demand
beyond the supply, let us suppose a supply exceeding the demand.
The competition will now be on the side of the sellers: the extra
quantity can only find a market by calling forth an additional
demand equal to itself. This is accomplished by means of
cheapness; the value falls, and brings the article within the
reach of more numerous customers, or induces those who were
already consumers to make increased purchases. The fall of value
required to re-establish equality, is different in different
cases. The kinds of things in which it is commonly greatest are
at the two extremities of the scale; absolute necessaries, or
those peculiar luxuries, the taste for which is confined to a
small class. In the case of food, as those who have already
enough do not require more on account of its cheapness, but
rather expend in other things what they save in food, the
increased consumption occasioned by cheapness, carries off, as
experience shows, only a small part of the extra supply caused by
an abundant harvest;(4*) and the fall is practically arrested
only when the farmers withdraw their corn, and hold it back in
hopes of a higher price; or by the operations of speculators who
buy corn when it is cheap, and store it up to be brought out when
more urgently wanted. Whether the demand and supply are equalized
by an increased demand, the result of cheapness, or by
withdrawing a part of the supply, equalized they are in either
case. 
    Thus we see that the idea of a ratio, as between demand and
supply, is out of place, and has no concern in the matter: the
proper mathematical analogy is that of an equation. Demand and
supply, the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied, will be
made equal. if unequal at any moment, competition equalizes them,
and the manner in which this is done is by an adjustment of the
value. If the demand increases, the value rises; if the demand
diminishes, the value falls: again, if the supply falls off, the
value rises; and falls if the supply is increased. The rise or
the fall continues until the demand and supply are again equal to
one another.. and the value which a commodity will bring in any
market, is no other than the value which, in that market, gives a
demand just sufficient to carry off the existing or expected
supply. 
    This, then, is the Law of Value, with respect to all
commodities not susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure. Such
commodities, no doubt, are exceptions. There is another law for
that much larger class of things, which admit of indefinite
multiplication. But it is not the less necessary to conceive
distinctly and grasp firmly the theory of this exceptional case.
In the first place, it will be found to be of great assistance in
rendering the more common case intelligible. And in the next
place, the principle of the exception stretches wider, and
embraces more cases, than might at first be supposed. 

    5. There are but few commodities which are naturally and
necessarily limited in supply. But any commodity whatever may be
artificially so. Any commodity may be the subject of a monopoly:
like tea, in this country, up to 1834; tobacco in France, opium
in British India, at present. The price of a monopolized
commodity is commonly supposed to be arbitrary; depending on the
will of the monopolist, and limited only (as in Mr. De Quincey's
case of the musical box in the wilds of America) by the buyer's
extreme estimate of its worth to himself. This is in one sense
true, but forms no exception, nevertheless, to the dependence of
the value on supply and demand. The monopolist can fix the value
as high as he pleases, short of what the consumer either could
not or would not pay'. but he can only do so by limiting the
supply. The Dutch East India Company obtained a monopoly price
for the produce of the Spice Islands, but to do so they were
obliged, in good seasons, to destroy a portion of the crop. Had
they persisted in selling all that they produced, they must have
forced a market by reducing the price, so low, perhaps, that they
would have received for the larger quantity a less total return
than for the smaller: at least they showed that such was their
opinion by destroying the surplus. Even on Lake Superior, Mr. De
Quincey's huckster could not have sold his box for sixty guineas,
if he had possessed two musical boxes and desired to sell them
both. Supposing the cost price of each to be six guineas, he
would have taken seventy for the two in preference to sixty for
one; that is, although his monopoly was the closest possible, he
would have sold the boxes at thirty-five guineas each,
notwithstanding that sixty was not beyond the buyer's estimate of
the article for his purposes. Monopoly value, therefore, does not
depend on any peculiar principle, but is a mere variety of the
ordinary case of demand and supply. 
    Again, though there are few commodities which are at all
times and for ever unsusceptible of increase of supply, any
commodity whatever may be temporarily so; and with some
commodities this is habitually the case. Agricultural produce,
for example, cannot be increased in quantity before the next
harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in the world, is
all that can be had for sometimes a year to come. During that
interval, corn is practically assimilated to things Of which the
quantity cannot be increased. In the case of most commodities, it
requires a certain time to increase their quantity; and if the
demand increases, then until a corresponding supply can he
brought forward, that is, until the supply can accommodate itself
to the demand, the value will so rise as to accommodate the
demand to the supply. 
    There is another case, the exact converse of this. There are
some articles of which the supply may be indefinitely increased,
but cannot be rapidly diminished. There are things so durable
that the quantity in existence is at all times very great in
comparison with the annual produce. Gold, and the more durable
metals, are things of this sort; and also houses. The supply of
such things might be at once diminished by destroying them; but
to do this could only be the interest of the possessor if he had
a monopoly of the article, and could repay himself for the
destruction of a part by the increased value of the remainder.
The value, therefore, of such things may continue for a long time
so low, either from excess of supply or falling off in the
demand, as to put a complete stop to further production; the
diminution of supply by wearing out being so slow a process, that
a long time is requisite, even under a total suspension of
production, to restore the original value. During that interval
the value will be regulated solely by supply and demand, and will
rise very gradually as the existing stock wears out, until there
is again a remunerating value, and production resumes its course.

    Finally, there are commodities of which, though capable of
being increased or diminished to a great, and even an unlimited
extent, the value never depends upon anything but demand and
supply. This is the case, in particular, with the commodity
Labour; of the value of which we have treated copiously in the
preceding Book: and there are many cases besides, in which we
shall find it necessary to call in this principle to solve
difficult questions of exchange value. This will be particularly
exemplified when we treat of International Values; that is, of
the terms of interchange between things produced in different
countries, or, to speak more generally, in distant places. But
into these questions we cannot enter, until we shall have
examined the case of commodities which can be increased in
quantity indefinitely and at pleasure; and shall have determined
by what law, other than that of Demand and Supply, the permanent
or average values of such commodities are regulated. This we
shall do in the next chapter. 

NOTES:

1. Logic of Political Economy, p. 13.

2. Adam Smith, who introduced the expression "effectual demand",
employed it to denote the demand of those who are willing and
able to give for the commodity what he calls its natural price,
that is, the price which will enable it to be permanently
produced and brought to market. -- See his chapter on Natural and
Market Price (book i. ch. 7)

3. "The price of corn in this country has risen from 100 to 200
per cent and upwards, when the utmost computed deficiency of the
crops has not been more than between one-sixth and one-third
below an average, and when that deficiency has been relieved by
foreign supplies. If there should be a deficiency of the crops
amounting to one-third, without any surplus from a former year,
and without any chance of relief by importation, the price might
rise five, six, or even tenfold." -- Tooke's History of Prices,
vol. i. pp. 13-5.

4. See Tooke, and the Report of the Agricultural Committee of
1821.

