





Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth

Century. 





Part I.



     Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth Century. -

Four Causes Of Decay And Destruction. - Example Of The Coliseum.

- Renovation Of The City. - Conclusion Of The Whole Work.



     In the last days of Pope Eugenius the Fourth, ^* two of his

servants, the learned Poggius ^1 and a friend, ascended the

Capitoline hill; reposed themselves among the ruins of columns

and temples; and viewed from that commanding spot the wide and

various prospect of desolation. ^2 The place and the object gave

ample scope for moralizing on the vicissitudes of fortune, which

spares neither man nor the proudest of his works, which buries

empires and cities in a common grave; and it was agreed, that in

proportion to her former greatness, the fall of Rome was the more

awful and deplorable.  "Her primeval state, such as she might

appear in a remote age, when Evander entertained the stranger of

Troy, ^3 has been delineated by the fancy of Virgil.  This

Tarpeian rock was then a savage and solitary thicket: in the time

of the poet, it was crowned with the golden roofs of a temple;

the temple is overthrown, the gold has been pillaged, the wheel

of fortune has accomplished her revolution, and the sacred ground

is again disfigured with thorns and brambles.  The hill of the

Capitol, on which we sit, was formerly the head of the Roman

empire, the citadel of the earth, the terror of kings;

illustrated by the footsteps of so many triumphs, enriched with

the spoils and tributes of so many nations.  This spectacle of

the world, how is it fallen! how changed!  how defaced!  The path

of victory is obliterated by vines, and the benches of the

senators are concealed by a dunghill.  Cast your eyes on the

Palatine hill, and seek among the shapeless and enormous

fragments the marble theatre, the obelisks, the colossal statues,

the porticos of Nero's palace: survey the other hills of the

city, the vacant space is interrupted only by ruins and gardens. 

The forum of the Roman people, where they assembled to enact

their laws and elect their magistrates, is now enclosed for the

cultivation of pot-herbs, or thrown open for the reception of

swine and buffaloes.  The public and private edifices, that were

founded for eternity, lie prostrate, naked, and broken, like the

limbs of a mighty giant; and the ruin is the more visible, from

the stupendous relics that have survived the injuries of time and

fortune." ^4



[Footnote *: It should be Pope Martin the Fifth.  See Gibbon's

own note, ch. lxv, note 51 and Hobhouse, Illustrations of Childe

Harold, p. 155. - M.] 

[Footnote 1: I have already (notes 50, 51, on chap. lxv.)

mentioned the age, character, and writings of Poggius; and

particularly noticed the date of this elegant moral lecture on

the varieties of fortune.]



[Footnote 2: Consedimus in ipsis Tarpeiae arcis ruinis, pone

ingens portae cujusdam, ut puto, templi, marmoreum limen,

plurimasque passim confractas columnas, unde magna ex parte

prospectus urbis patet, (p. 5.)] 

[Footnote 3: Aeneid viii. 97 - 369.  This ancient picture, so

artfully introduced, and so exquisitely finished, must have been

highly interesting to an inhabitant of Rome; and our early

studies allow us to sympathize in the feelings of a Roman.]



[Footnote 4: Capitolium adeo . . . . immutatum ut vineae in

senatorum subellia successerint, stercorum ac purgamentorum

receptaculum factum. Respice ad Palatinum montem . . . . . vasta

rudera . . . . caeteroscolles perlustra omnia vacua aedificiis,

ruinis vineisque oppleta conspicies, (Poggius, de Varietat.

Fortunae p. 21.)]



     These relics are minutely described by Poggius, one of the

first who raised his eyes from the monuments of legendary, to

those of classic, superstition. ^5 1. Besides a bridge, an arch,

a sepulchre, and the pyramid of Cestius, he could discern, of the

age of the republic, a double row of vaults, in the salt-office

of the Capitol, which were inscribed with the name and

munificence of Catulus.  2. Eleven temples were visible in some

degree, from the perfect form of the Pantheon, to the three

arches and a marble column of the temple of Peace, which

Vespasian erected after the civil wars and the Jewish triumph. 

3. Of the number, which he rashly defines, of seven thermoe, or

public baths, none were sufficiently entire to represent the use

and distribution of the several parts: but those of Diocletian

and Antoninus Caracalla still retained the titles of the

founders, and astonished the curious spectator, who, in observing

their solidity and extent, the variety of marbles, the size and

multitude of the columns, compared the labor and expense with the

use and importance.  Of the baths of Constantine, of Alexander,

of Domitian, or rather of Titus, some vestige might yet be found.

4. The triumphal arches of Titus, Severus, and Constantine, were

entire, both the structure and the inscriptions; a falling

fragment was honored with the name of Trajan; and two arches,

then extant, in the Flaminian way, have been ascribed to the

baser memory of Faustina and Gallienus. ^* 5. After the wonder of

the Coliseum, Poggius might have overlooked small amphitheatre of

brick, most probably for the use of the praetorian camp: the

theatres of Marcellus and Pompey were occupied in a great measure

by public and private buildings; and in the Circus, Agonalis and

Maximus, little more than the situation and the form could be

investigated.  6. The columns of Trajan and Antonine were still

erect; but the Egyptian obelisks were broken or buried. A people

of gods and heroes, the workmanship of art, was reduced to one

equestrian figure of gilt brass, and to five marble statues, of

which the most conspicuous were the two horses of Phidias and

Praxiteles.  7. The two mausoleums or sepulchres of Augustus and

Hadrian could not totally be lost: but the former was only

visible as a mound of earth; and the latter, the castle of St.

Angelo, had acquired the name and appearance of a modern

fortress.  With the addition of some separate and nameless

columns, such were the remains of the ancient city; for the marks

of a more recent structure might be detected in the walls, which

formed a circumference of ten miles, included three hundred and

seventy-nine turrets, and opened into the country by thirteen

gates.



[Footnote 5: See Poggius, p. 8 - 22.]



[Footnote *: One was in the Via Nomentana; est alter praetevea

Gallieno principi dicatus, ut superscriptio indicat, Via

Nomentana.  Hobhouse, p. 154. Poggio likewise mentions the

building which Gibbon ambiguously says be "might have

overlooked." - M.]



     This melancholy picture was drawn above nine hundred years

after the fall of the Western empire, and even of the Gothic

kingdom of Italy.  A long period of distress and anarchy, in

which empire, and arts, and riches had migrated from the banks of

the Tyber, was incapable of restoring or adorning the city; and,

as all that is human must retrograde if it do not advance, every

successive age must have hastened the ruin of the works of

antiquity. To measure the progress of decay, and to ascertain, at

each aera, the state of each edifice, would be an endless and a

useless labor; and I shall content myself with two observations,

which will introduce a short inquiry into the general causes and

effects.  1. Two hundred years before the eloquent complaint of

Poggius, an anonymous writer composed a description of Rome. ^6

His ignorance may repeat the same objects under strange and

fabulous names. Yet this barbarous topographer had eyes and ears;

he could observe the visible remains; he could listen to the

tradition of the people; and he distinctly enumerates seven

theatres, eleven baths, twelve arches, and eighteen palaces, of

which many had disappeared before the time of Poggius. It is

apparent, that many stately monuments of antiquity survived till

a late period, ^7 and that the principles of destruction acted

with vigorous and increasing energy in the thirteenth and

fourteenth centuries.  2. The same reflection must be applied to

the three last ages; and we should vainly seek the Septizonium of

Severus; ^8 which is celebrated by Petrarch and the antiquarians

of the sixteenth century.  While the Roman edifices were still

entire, the first blows, however weighty and impetuous, were

resisted by the solidity of the mass and the harmony of the

parts; but the slightest touch would precipitate the fragments of

arches and columns, that already nodded to their fall.



[Footnote 6: Liber de Mirabilibus Romae ex Registro Nicolai

Cardinalis de Amagonia in Bibliotheca St. Isidori Armario IV.,

No. 69.  This treatise, with some short but pertinent notes, has

been published by Montfaucon, (Diarium Italicum, p. 283 - 301,)

who thus delivers his own critical opinion: Scriptor xiiimi.

circiter saeculi, ut ibidem notatur; antiquariae rei imperitus

et, ut ab illo aevo, nugis et anilibus fabellis refertus: sed,

quia monumenta, quae iis temporibus Romae supererant pro modulo

recenset, non parum inde lucis mutuabitur qu Romanis

antiquitatibus indagandis operam navabit, (p. 283.)] 

[Footnote 7: The Pere Mabillon (Analecta, tom. iv. p. 502) has

published an anonymous pilgrim of the ixth century, who, in his

visit round the churches and holy places at Rome, touches on

several buildings, especially porticos, which had disappeared

before the xiiith century.]



[Footnote 8: On the Septizonium, see the Memoires sur Petrarque,

(tom. i. p. 325,) Donatus, (p. 338,) and Nardini, (p. 117, 414.)]



     After a diligent inquiry, I can discern four principal

causes of the ruin of Rome, which continued to operate in a

period of more than a thousand years. I. The injuries of time and

nature.  II. The hostile attacks of the Barbarians and

Christians.  III. The use and abuse of the materials.  And, IV.

The domestic quarrels of the Romans.



     I. The art of man is able to construct monuments far more

permanent than the narrow span of his own existence; yet these

monuments, like himself, are perishable and frail; and in the

boundless annals of time, his life and his labors must equally be

measured as a fleeting moment.  Of a simple and solid edifice, it

is not easy, however, to circumscribe the duration.  As the

wonders of ancient days, the pyramids ^9 attracted the curiosity

of the ancients: a hundred generations, the leaves of autumn,

have dropped ^10 into the grave; and after the fall of the

Pharaohs and Ptolemies, the Caesars and caliphs, the same

pyramids stand erect and unshaken above the floods of the Nile. 

A complex figure of various and minute parts to more accessible

to injury and decay; and the silent lapse of time is often

accelerated by hurricanes and earthquakes, by fires and

inundations.  The air and earth have doubtless been shaken; and

the lofty turrets of Rome have tottered from their foundations;

but the seven hills do not appear to be placed on the great

cavities of the globe; nor has the city, in any age, been exposed

to the convulsions of nature, which, in the climate of Antioch,

Lisbon, or Lima, have crumbled in a few moments the works of ages

into dust.  Fire is the most powerful agent of life and death:

the rapid mischief may be kindled and propagated by the industry

or negligence of mankind; and every period of the Roman annals is

marked by the repetition of similar calamities.  A memorable

conflagration, the guilt or misfortune of Nero's reign,

continued, though with unequal fury, either six or nine days. ^11

Innumerable buildings, crowded in close and crooked streets,

supplied perpetual fuel for the flames; and when they ceased,

four only of the fourteen regions were left entire; three were

totally destroyed, and seven were deformed by the relics of

smoking and lacerated edifices. ^12 In the full meridian of

empire, the metropolis arose with fresh beauty from her ashes;

yet the memory of the old deplored their irreparable losses, the

arts of Greece, the trophies of victory, the monuments of

primitive or fabulous antiquity.  In the days of distress and

anarchy, every wound is mortal, every fall irretrievable; nor can

the damage be restored either by the public care of government,

or the activity of private interest.  Yet two causes may be

alleged, which render the calamity of fire more destructive to a

flourishing than a decayed city. 1. The more combustible

materials of brick, timber, and metals, are first melted or

consumed; but the flames may play without injury or effect on the

naked walls, and massy arches, that have been despoiled of their

ornaments. 2. It is among the common and plebeian habitations,

that a mischievous spark is most easily blown to a conflagration;

but as soon as they are devoured, the greater edifices, which

have resisted or escaped, are left as so many islands in a state

of solitude and safety.  From her situation, Rome is exposed to

the danger of frequent inundations.  Without excepting the Tyber,

the rivers that descend from either side of the Apennine have a

short and irregular course; a shallow stream in the summer heats;

an impetuous torrent, when it is swelled in the spring or winter,

by the fall of rain, and the melting of the snows.  When the

current is repelled from the sea by adverse winds, when the

ordinary bed is inadequate to the weight of waters, they rise

above the banks, and overspread, without limits or control, the

plains and cities of the adjacent country.  Soon after the

triumph of the first Punic war, the Tyber was increased by

unusual rains; and the inundation, surpassing all former measure

of time and place, destroyed all the buildings that were situated

below the hills of Rome.  According to the variety of ground, the

same mischief was produced by different means; and the edifices

were either swept away by the sudden impulse, or dissolved and

undermined by the long continuance, of the flood. ^13 Under the

reign of Augustus, the same calamity was renewed: the lawless

river overturned the palaces and temples on its banks; ^14 and,

after the labors of the emperor in cleansing and widening the bed

that was encumbered with ruins, ^15 the vigilance of his

successors was exercised by similar dangers and designs.  The

project of diverting into new channels the Tyber itself, or some

of the dependent streams, was long opposed by superstition and

local interests; ^16 nor did the use compensate the toil and cost

of the tardy and imperfect execution.  The servitude of rivers is

the noblest and most important victory which man has obtained

over the licentiousness of nature; ^17 and if such were the

ravages of the Tyber under a firm and active government, what

could oppose, or who can enumerate, the injuries of the city,

after the fall of the Western empire?  A remedy was at length

produced by the evil itself: the accumulation of rubbish and the

earth, that has been washed down from the hills, is supposed to

have elevated the plain of Rome, fourteen or fifteen feet,

perhaps, above the ancient level; ^18 and the modern city is less

accessible to the attacks of the river. ^19



[Footnote 9: The age of the pyramids is remote and unknown, since

Diodorus Siculus (tom. i l. i. c. 44, p. 72) is unable to decide

whether they were constructed 1000, or 3400, years before the

clxxxth Olympiad.  Sir John Marsham's contracted scale of the

Egyptian dynasties would fix them about 2000 years before Christ,

(Canon. Chronicus, p. 47.)]



[Footnote 10: See the speech of Glaucus in the Iliad, (Z. 146.)

This natural but melancholy image is peculiar to Homer.]



[Footnote 11: The learning and criticism of M. des Vignoles

(Histoire Critique de la Republique des Lettres, tom. viii. p. 47

- 118, ix. p. 172 - 187) dates the fire of Rome from A.D. 64,

July 19, and the subsequent persecution of the Christians from


November 15 of the same year.]



[Footnote 12: Quippe in regiones quatuordecim Roma dividitur,

quarum quatuor integrae manebant, tres solo tenus dejectae:

septem reliquis pauca testorum vestigia supererant, lacera et

semiusta.  Among the old relics that were irreparably lost,

Tacitus enumerates the temple of the moon of Servius Tullius; the

fane and altar consecrated by Evander praesenti Herculi; the

temple of Jupiter Stator, a vow of Romulus; the palace of Numa;

the temple of Vesta cum Penatibus populi Romani.  He then

deplores the opes tot victoriis quaesitae et Graecarum artium

decora . . . . multa quae seniores meminerant, quae reparari

nequibant, (Annal. xv. 40, 41.)]



[Footnote 13: A. U. C. 507, repentina subversio ipsius Romae

praevenit triumphum Romanorum. . . . . diversae ignium aquarumque

cladespene absumsere urbem Nam Tiberis insolitis auctus imbribus

et ultra opinionem, vel diuturnitate vel maguitudine redundans

omnia Romae aedificia in plano posita delevit.  Diversae

qualitate locorum ad unam convenere perniciem: quoniam et quae

segniori inundatio tenuit madefacta dissolvit, et quae cursus

torrentis invenit impulsa dejecit, (Orosius, Hist. l. iv. c. 11,

p. 244, edit. Havercamp.) Yet we may observe, that it is the plan

and study of the Christian apologist to magnify the calamities of

the Pagan world.]



[Footnote 14: Vidimus flavum Tiberim, retortis

              Littore Etrusco violenter undis,

              Ire dejectum monumenta Regis

              Templaque Vestae.



              (Horat. Carm. I. 2.)



If the palace of Numa and temple of Vesta were thrown down in

Horace's time, what was consumed of those buildings by Nero's

fire could hardly deserve the epithets of vetustissima or

incorrupta.]



[Footnote 15: Ad coercendas inundationes alveum Tiberis laxavit,

ac repurgavit, completum olim ruderibus, et aedificiorum

prolapsionibus coarctatum, (Suetonius in Augusto, c. 30.)]



[Footnote 16: Tacitus (Annal. i. 79) reports the petitions of the

different towns of Italy to the senate against the measure; and

we may applaud the progress of reason.  On a similar occasion,

local interests would undoubtedly be consulted: but an English

House of Commons would reject with contempt the arguments of

superstition, "that nature had assigned to the rivers their

proper course," &c.]



[Footnote 17: See the Epoques de la Nature of the eloquent and

philosophic Buffon.  His picture of Guyana, in South America, is

that of a new and savage land, in which the waters are abandoned

to themselves without being regulated by human industry, (p. 212,

561, quarto edition.)]



[Footnote 18: In his travels in Italy, Mr. Addison (his works,

vol. ii. p. 98, Baskerville's edition) has observed this curious

and unquestionable fact.] 

[Footnote 19: Yet in modern times, the Tyber has sometimes

damaged the city, and in the years 1530, 1557, 1598, the annals

of Muratori record three mischievous and memorable inundations,

(tom. xiv. p. 268, 429, tom. xv. p. 99, &c.)



     Note: The level of the Tyber was at one time supposed to be

considerably raised: recent investigations seem to be conclusive

against this supposition. See a brief, but satisfactory statement

of the question in Bunsen and Platner, Roms Beschreibung. vol. i.

p. 29. - M.]



     II. The crowd of writers of every nation, who impute the

destruction of the Roman monuments to the Goths and the

Christians, have neglected to inquire how far they were animated

by a hostile principle, and how far they possessed the means and

the leisure to satiate their enmity.  In the preceding volumes of

this History, I have described the triumph of barbarism and

religion; and I can only resume, in a few words, their real or

imaginary connection with the ruin of ancient Rome.  Our fancy

may create, or adopt, a pleasing romance, that the Goths and

Vandals sallied from Scandinavia, ardent to avenge the flight of

Odin; ^20 to break the chains, and to chastise the oppressors, of

mankind; that they wished to burn the records of classic

literature, and to found their national architecture on the

broken members of the Tuscan and Corinthian orders.  But in

simple truth, the northern conquerors were neither sufficiently

savage, nor sufficiently refined, to entertain such aspiring

ideas of destruction and revenge.  The shepherds of Scythia and

Germany had been educated in the armies of the empire, whose

discipline they acquired, and whose weakness they invaded: with

the familiar use of the Latin tongue, they had learned to

reverence the name and titles of Rome; and, though incapable of

emulating, they were more inclined to admire, than to abolish,

the arts and studies of a brighter period.  In the transient

possession of a rich and unresisting capital, the soldiers of

Alaric and Genseric were stimulated by the passions of a

victorious army; amidst the wanton indulgence of lust or cruelty,

portable wealth was the object of their search; nor could they

derive either pride or pleasure from the unprofitable reflection,

that they had battered to the ground the works of the consuls and

Caesars.  Their moments were indeed precious; the Goths evacuated

Rome on the sixth, ^21 the Vandals on the fifteenth, day: ^22

and, though it be far more difficult to build than to destroy,

their hasty assault would have made a slight impression on the

solid piles of antiquity.  We may remember, that both Alaric and

Genseric affected to spare the buildings of the city; that they

subsisted in strength and beauty under the auspicious government

of Theodoric; ^23 and that the momentary resentment of Totila ^24

was disarmed by his own temper and the advice of his friends and

enemies. From these innocent Barbarians, the reproach may be

transferred to the Catholics of Rome.  The statues, altars, and

houses, of the daemons, were an abomination in their eyes; and in

the absolute command of the city, they might labor with zeal and

perseverance to erase the idolatry of their ancestors.  The

demolition of the temples in the East ^25 affords to them an

example of conduct, and to us an argument of belief; and it is

probable that a portion of guilt or merit may be imputed with

justice to the Roman proselytes.  Yet their abhorrence was

confined to the monuments of heathen superstition; and the civil

structures that were dedicated to the business or pleasure of

society might be preserved without injury or scandal.  The change

of religion was accomplished, not by a popular tumult, but by the

decrees of the emperors, of the senate, and of time.  Of the

Christian hierarchy, the bishops of Rome were commonly the most

prudent and least fanatic; nor can any positive charge be opposed

to the meritorious act of saving or converting the majestic

structure of the Pantheon. ^26 ^* 

[Footnote 20: I take this opportunity of declaring, that in the

course of twelve years, I have forgotten, or renounced, the

flight of Odin from Azoph to Sweden, which I never very seriously

believed, (vol. i. p. 283.) The Goths are apparently Germans: but

all beyond Caesar and Tacitus is darkness or fable, in the

antiquities of Germany.]



[Footnote 21: History of the Decline, &c., vol. iii. p. 291.] 

[Footnote 22: - vol. iii. p. 464.]



[Footnote 23: - vol. iv. p. 23 - 25.]



[Footnote 24: - vol. iv. p. 258.]



[Footnote 25: - vol. iii. c. xxviii. p. 139 - 148.]



[Footnote 26: Eodem tempore petiit a Phocate principe templum,

quod appellatur Pantheon, in quo fecit ecclesiam Sanctae Mariae

semper Virginis, et omnium martyrum; in qua ecclesiae princeps

multa bona obtulit, (Anastasius vel potius Liber Pontificalis in

Bonifacio IV., in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii.

P. i. p. 135.) According to the anonymous writer in Montfaucon,

the Pantheon had been vowed by Agrippa to Cybele and Neptune, and

was dedicated by Boniface IV., on the calends of November, to the

Virgin, quae est mater omnium sanctorum, (p. 297, 298.)]



[Footnote *: The popes, under the dominion of the emperor and of

the exarcha, according to Feas's just observation, did not

possess the power of disposing of the buildings and monuments of

the city according to their own will. Bunsen and Platner, vol. i.

p. 241. - M.]



     III. The value of any object that supplies the wants or

pleasures of mankind is compounded of its substance and its form,

of the materials and the manufacture.  Its price must depend on

the number of persons by whom it may be acquired and used; on the

extent of the market; and consequently on the ease or difficulty

of remote exportation, according to the nature of the commodity,

its local situation, and the temporary circumstances of the

world. The Barbarian conquerors of Rome usurped in a moment the

toil and treasure of successive ages; but, except the luxuries of

immediate consumption, they must view without desire all that

could not be removed from the city in the Gothic wagons or the

fleet of the Vandals. ^27 Gold and silver were the first objects

of their avarice; as in every country, and in the smallest

compass, they represent the most ample command of the industry

and possessions of mankind. A vase or a statue of those precious

metals might tempt the vanity of some Barbarian chief; but the

grosser multitude, regardless of the form, was tenacious only of

the substance; and the melted ingots might be readily divided and

stamped into the current coin of the empire.  The less active or

less fortunate robbers were reduced to the baser plunder of

brass, lead, iron, and copper: whatever had escaped the Goths and

Vandals was pillaged by the Greek tyrants; and the emperor

Constans, in his rapacious visit, stripped the bronze tiles from

the roof of the Pantheon. ^28 The edifices of Rome might be

considered as a vast and various mine; the first labor of

extracting the materials was already performed; the metals were

purified and cast; the marbles were hewn and polished; and after

foreign and domestic rapine had been satiated, the remains of the

city, could a purchaser have been found, were still venal.  The

monuments of antiquity had been left naked of their precious

ornaments; but the Romans would demolish with their own hands the

arches and walls, if the hope of profit could surpass the cost of

the labor and exportation.  If Charlemagne had fixed in Italy the

seat of the Western empire, his genius would have aspired to

restore, rather than to violate, the works of the Caesars; but

policy confined the French monarch to the forests of Germany; his

taste could be gratified only by destruction; and the new palace

of Aix la Chapelle was decorated with the marbles of Ravenna ^29

and Rome. ^30 Five hundred years after Charlemagne, a king of

Sicily, Robert, the wisest and most liberal sovereign of the age,

was supplied with the same materials by the easy navigation of

the Tyber and the sea; and Petrarch sighs an indignant complaint,

that the ancient capital of the world should adorn from her own

bowels the slothful luxury of Naples. ^31 But these examples of

plunder or purchase were rare in the darker ages; and the Romans,

alone and unenvied, might have applied to their private or public

use the remaining structures of antiquity, if in their present

form and situation they had not been useless in a great measure

to the city and its inhabitants.  The walls still described the

old circumference, but the city had descended from the seven

hills into the Campus Martius; and some of the noblest monuments

which had braved the injuries of time were left in a desert, far

remote from the habitations of mankind.  The palaces of the

senators were no longer adapted to the manners or fortunes of

their indigent successors: the use of baths ^32 and porticos was

forgotten: in the sixth century, the games of the theatre,

amphitheatre, and circus, had been interrupted: some temples were

devoted to the prevailing worship; but the Christian churches

preferred the holy figure of the cross; and fashion, or reason,

had distributed after a peculiar model the cells and offices of

the cloister.  Under the ecclesiastical reign, the number of

these pious foundations was enormously multiplied; and the city

was crowded with forty monasteries of men, twenty of women, and

sixty chapters and colleges of canons and priests, ^33 who

aggravated, instead of relieving, the depopulation of the tenth

century.  But if the forms of ancient architecture were

disregarded by a people insensible of their use and beauty, the

plentiful materials were applied to every call of necessity or

superstition; till the fairest columns of the Ionic and

Corinthian orders, the richest marbles of Paros and Numidia, were

degraded, perhaps to the support of a convent or a stable.  The

daily havoc which is perpetrated by the Turks in the cities of

Greece and Asia may afford a melancholy example; and in the

gradual destruction of the monuments of Rome, Sixtus the Fifth

may alone be excused for employing the stones of the Septizonium

in the glorious edifice of St. Peter's. ^34 A fragment, a ruin,

howsoever mangled or profaned, may be viewed with pleasure and

regret; but the greater part of the marble was deprived of

substance, as well as of place and proportion; it was burnt to

lime for the purpose of cement. ^* Since the arrival of Poggius,

the temple of Concord, ^35 and many capital structures, had

vanished from his eyes; and an epigram of the same age expresses

a just and pious fear, that the continuance of this practice

would finally annihilate all the monuments of antiquity. ^36 The

smallness of their numbers was the sole check on the demands and

depredations of the Romans.  The imagination of Petrarch might

create the presence of a mighty people; ^37 and I hesitate to

believe, that, even in the fourteenth century, they could be

reduced to a contemptible list of thirty-three thousand

inhabitants.  From that period to the reign of Leo the Tenth, if

they multiplied to the amount of eighty-five thousand, ^38 the

increase of citizens was in some degree pernicious to the ancient

city.



[Footnote 27: Flaminius Vacca (apud Montfaucon, p. 155, 156.  His

memoir is likewise printed, p. 21, at the end of the Roman Antica

of Nardini) and several Romans, doctrina graves, were persuaded

that the Goths buried their treasures at Rome, and bequeathed the

secret marks filiis nepotibusque.  He relates some anedotes to

prove, that in his own time, these places were visited and rifled

by the Transalpine pilgrims, the heirs of the Gothic conquerors.]



[Footnote 28: Omnia quae erant in aere ad ornatum civitatis

deposuit, sed e ecclesiam B. Mariae ad martyres quae de tegulis

aereis cooperta discooperuit, (Anast. in Vitalian. p. 141.) The

base and sacrilegious Greek had not even the poor pretence of

plundering a heathen temple, the Pantheon was already a Catholic

church.]



[Footnote 29: For the spoils of Ravenna (musiva atque marmora)

see the original grant of Pope Adrian I. to Charlemagne, (Codex

Carolin. epist. lxvii. in Muratori, Script. Ital. tom. iii. P.

ii. p. 223.)]



[Footnote 30: I shall quote the authentic testimony of the Saxon

poet, (A.D. 887 - 899,) de Rebus gestis Caroli magni, l. v. 437 -

440, in the Historians of France, (tom. v. p. 180:)



     Ad quae marmoreas praestabat Roma columnas,

     Quasdam praecipuas pul hra Ravenna dedit.

     De tam longinqua poterit regiona vetustas

     Illius ornatum, Francia, ferre tibi.



And I shall add from the Chronicle of Sigebert, (Historians of

France, tom. v. p. 378,) extruxit etiam Aquisgrani basilicam

plurimae pulchritudinis, ad cujus structuram a Roma et Ravenna

columnas et marmora devehi fecit.] 

[Footnote 31: I cannot refuse to transcribe a long passage of

Petrarch (Opp. p. 536, 537) in Epistola hortatoria ad Nicolaum

Laurentium; it is so strong and full to the point: Nec pudor aut

pietas continuit quominus impii spoliata Dei templa, occupatas

arces, opes publicas, regiones urbis, atque honores magistratuum

inter se divisos; (habeant?) quam una in re, turbulenti ac

seditiosi homines et totius reliquae vitae consiliis et

rationibus discordes, inhumani foederis stupenda societate

convenirent, in pontes et moenia atque immeritos lapides

desaevirent.  Denique post vi vel senio collapsa palatia, quae

quondam ingentes tenuerunt viri, post diruptos arcus triumphales,

(unde majores horum forsitan corruerunt,) de ipsius vetustatis ac

propriae impietatis fragminibus vilem quaestum turpi mercimonio

captare non puduit. Itaque nunc, heu dolor!  heu scelus indignum!



de vestris marmoreis columnis, de liminibus templorum, (ad quae

nuper ex orbe toto concursus devotissimus fiebat,) de imaginibus

sepulchrorum sub quibus patrum vestrorum venerabilis civis

(cinis?) erat, ut reliquas sileam, desidiosa Neapolis adornatur. 

Sic paullatim ruinae ipsae deficiunt.  Yet King Robert was the

friend of Petrarch.]



[Footnote 32: Yet Charlemagne washed and swam at Aix la Chapelle

with a hundred of his courtiers, (Eginhart, c. 22, p. 108, 109,)

and Muratori describes, as late as the year 814, the public baths

which were built at Spoleto in Italy, (Annali, tom. vi. p. 416.)]



[Footnote 33: See the Annals of Italy, A.D. 988.  For this and

the preceding fact, Muratori himself is indebted to the

Benedictine history of Pere Mabillon.]



[Footnote 34: Vita di Sisto Quinto, da Gregorio Leti, tom. iii.

p. 50.] 

[Footnote *: From the quotations in Bunsen's Dissertation, it may

be suspected that this slow but continual process of destruction

was the most fatal. - M] 

[Footnote 35: Porticus aedis Concordiae, quam cum primum ad urbem

accessi vidi fere integram opere marmoreo admodum specioso:

Romani postmodum ad calcem aedem totam et porticus partem

disjectis columnis sunt demoliti, (p. 12.) The temple of Concord

was therefore not destroyed by a sedition in the xiiith century,

as I have read in a MS. treatise del' Governo civile di Rome,

lent me formerly at Rome, and ascribed (I believe falsely) to the

celebrated Gravina. Poggius likewise affirms that the sepulchre

of Caecilia Metella was burnt for lime, (p. 19, 20.)]



[Footnote 36: Composed by Aeneas Sylvius, afterwards Pope Pius

II., and published by Mabillon, from a Ms. of the queen of

Sweden, (Musaeum Italicum, tom. i. p. 97.)



     Oblectat me, Roma, tuas spectare ruinas:

     Ex cujus lapsu gloria prisca patet.

     Sed tuus hic populus muris defossa vetustis

     Calcis in obsequium marmora dura coquit.

     Impia tercentum si sic gens egerit annos

     Nullum hinc indicium nobilitatis erit.]



[Footnote 37: Vagabamur pariter in illa urbe tam magna; quae, cum

propter spatium vacua videretur, populum habet immensum, (Opp p.

605 Epist. Familiares, ii. 14.)]



[Footnote 38: These states of the population of Rome at different

periods are derived from an ingenious treatise of the physician

Lancisi, de Romani Coeli Qualitatibus, (p. 122.)]



     IV. I have reserved for the last, the most potent and

forcible cause of destruction, the domestic hostilities of the

Romans themselves.  Under the dominion of the Greek and French

emperors, the peace of the city was disturbed by accidental,

though frequent, seditions: it is from the decline of the latter,

from the beginning of the tenth century, that we may date the

licentiousness of private war, which violated with impunity the

laws of the Code and the Gospel, without respecting the majesty

of the absent sovereign, or the presence and person of the vicar

of Christ.  In a dark period of five hundred years, Rome was

perpetually afflicted by the sanguinary quarrels of the nobles

and the people, the Guelphs and Ghibelines, the Colonna and

Ursini; and if much has escaped the knowledge, and much is

unworthy of the notice, of history, I have exposed in the two

preceding chapters the causes and effects of the public

disorders.  At such a time, when every quarrel was decided by the

sword, and none could trust their lives or properties to the

impotence of law, the powerful citizens were armed for safety, or

offence, against the domestic enemies whom they feared or hated. 

Except Venice alone, the same dangers and designs were common to

all the free republics of Italy; and the nobles usurped the

prerogative of fortifying their houses, and erecting strong

towers, ^39 that were capable of resisting a sudden attack. The

cities were filled with these hostile edifices; and the example

of Lucca, which contained three hundred towers; her law, which

confined their height to the measure of fourscore feet, may be

extended with suitable latitude to the more opulent and populous

states.  The first step of the senator Brancaleone in the

establishment of peace and justice, was to demolish (as we have

already seen) one hundred and forty of the towers of Rome; and,

in the last days of anarchy and discord, as late as the reign of

Martin the Fifth, forty-four still stood in one of the thirteen

or fourteen regions of the city.  To this mischievous purpose the

remains of antiquity were most readily adapted: the temples and

arches afforded a broad and solid basis for the new structures of

brick and stone; and we can name the modern turrets that were

raised on the triumphal monuments of Julius Caesar, Titus, and

the Antonines. ^40 With some slight alterations, a theatre, an

amphitheatre, a mausoleum, was transformed into a strong and

spacious citadel.  I need not repeat, that the mole of Adrian has

assumed the title and form of the castle of St. Angelo; ^41 the

Septizonium of Severus was capable of standing against a royal

army; ^42 the sepulchre of Metella has sunk under its outworks;

^43 ^* the theatres of Pompey and Marcellus were occupied by the

Savelli and Ursini families; ^44 and the rough fortress has been

gradually softened to the splendor and elegance of an Italian

palace.  Even the churches were encompassed with arms and

bulwarks, and the military engines on the roof of St. Peter's

were the terror of the Vatican and the scandal of the Christian

world.  Whatever is fortified will be attacked; and whatever is

attacked may be destroyed.  Could the Romans have wrested from

the popes the castle of St. Angelo, they had resolved by a public

decree to annihilate that monument of servitude.  Every building

of defence was exposed to a siege; and in every siege the arts

and engines of destruction were laboriously employed.  After the

death of Nicholas the Fourth, Rome, without a sovereign or a

senate, was abandoned six months to the fury of civil war.  "The

houses," says a cardinal and poet of the times, ^45 "were crushed

by the weight and velocity of enormous stones; ^46 the walls were

perforated by the strokes of the battering-ram; the towers were

involved in fire and smoke; and the assailants were stimulated by

rapine and revenge." The work was consummated by the tyranny of

the laws; and the factions of Italy alternately exercised a blind

and thoughtless vengeance on their adversaries, whose houses and

castles they razed to the ground. ^47 In comparing the days of

foreign, with the ages of domestic, hostility, we must pronounce,

that the latter have been far more ruinous to the city; and our

opinion is confirmed by the evidence of Petrarch.  "Behold," says

the laureate, "the relics of Rome, the image of her pristine

greatness!  neither time nor the Barbarian can boast the merit of

this stupendous destruction: it was perpetrated by her own

citizens, by the most illustrious of her sons; and your ancestors

(he writes to a noble Annabaldi) have done with the battering-ram

what the Punic hero could not accomplish with the sword." ^48 The

influence of the two last principles of decay must in some degree

be multiplied by each other; since the houses and towers, which

were subverted by civil war, required by a new and perpetual

supply from the monuments of antiquity. ^*



[Footnote 39: All the facts that relate to the towers at Rome,

and in other free cities of Italy, may be found in the laborious

and entertaining compilation of Muratori, Antiquitates Italiae

Medii Aevi, dissertat. xxvi., (tom. ii. p. 493 - 496, of the

Latin, tom. . p. 446, of the Italian work.)] 

[Footnote 40: As for instance, templum Jani nunc dicitur, turris

Centii Frangipanis; et sane Jano impositae turris lateritiae

conspicua hodieque vestigia supersunt, (Montfaucon Diarium

Italicum, p. 186.) The anonymous writer (p. 285) enumerates,

arcus Titi, turris Cartularia; arcus Julii Caesaris et Senatorum,

turres de Bratis; arcus Antonini, turris de Cosectis, &c.]



[Footnote 41: Hadriani molem . . . . magna ex parte Romanorum

injuria . . disturbavit; quod certe funditus evertissent, si

eorum manibus pervia, absumptis grandibus saxis, reliqua moles

exstisset, (Poggius de Varietate Fortunae, p. 12.)]



[Footnote 42: Against the emperor Henry IV., (Muratori, Annali d'

Italia, tom. ix. p. 147.)]



[Footnote 43: I must copy an important passage of Montfaucon:

Turris ingens rotunda . . . . Caeciliae Metellae . . . .

sepulchrum erat, cujus muri tam solidi, ut spatium perquam

minimum intus vacuum supersit; et Torre di Bove dicitur, a boum

capitibus muro inscriptis.  Huic sequiori aevo, tempore

intestinorum bellorum, ceu urbecula adjuncta fuit, cujus moenia

et turres etiamnum visuntur; ita ut sepulchrum Metellae quasi arx

oppiduli fuerit. Ferventibus in urbe partibus, cum Ursini atque

Colum nenses mutuis cladibus perniciem inferrent civitati, in

utriusve partia ditionem cederet magni momenti erat, (p. 142.)]



[Footnote *: This is inaccurately expressed.  The sepulchre is

still standing See Hobhouse, p. 204. - M.]



[Footnote 44: See the testimonies of Donatus, Nardini, and

Montfaucon.  In the Savelli palace, the remains of the theatre of

Marcellus are still great and conspicuous.]



[Footnote 45: James, cardinal of St. George, ad velum aureum, in

his metrical life of Pope Celestin V., (Muratori, Script. Ital.

tom. i. P. iii. p. 621, l. i. c. l. ver. 132, &c.)



Hoc dixisse sat est, Romam caruisee Senatu Mensibus exactis heu

sex; belloque vocatum (vocatos) In scelus, in socios fraternaque

vulnera patres; Tormentis jecisse viros immania saxa; Perfodisse

domus trabibus, fecisse ruinas Ignibus; incensas turres,

obscuraque fumo Lumina vicino, quo sit spoliata supellex.] 

[Footnote 46: Muratori (Dissertazione sopra le Antiquita

Italiane, tom. i. p. 427 - 431) finds that stone bullets of two

or three hundred pounds' weight were not uncommon; and they are

sometimes computed at xii. or xviii cantari of Genoa, each

cantaro weighing 150 pounds.]



[Footnote 47: The vith law of the Visconti prohibits this common

and mischievous practice; and strictly enjoins, that the houses

of banished citizens should be preserved pro communi utilitate,

(Gualvancus de la Flamma in Muratori, Script. Rerum Italicarum,

tom. xii. p. 1041.)] 

[Footnote 48: Petrarch thus addresses his friend, who, with shame

and tears had shown him the moenia, lacerae specimen miserable

Romae, and declared his own intention of restoring them, (Carmina

Latina, l. ii. epist. Paulo Annibalensi, xii. p. 97, 98.)



Nec te parva manet servatis fama ruinis Quanta quod integrae fuit

olim gloria Romae Reliquiae testantur adhuc; quas longior aetas

Frangere non valuit; non vis aut ira cruenti Hostis, ab egregiis

franguntur civibus, heu!  heu' - Quod ille nequivit (Hannibal.)

Perficit hic aries.]



[Footnote *: Bunsen has shown that the hostile attacks of the

emperor Henry the Fourth, but more particularly that of Robert

Guiscard, who burned down whole districts, inflicted the worst

damage on the ancient city Vol. i. p. 247. - M.]





Chapter LXXI: Prospect Of The Ruins Of Rome In The Fifteenth

Century. 





Part II.



     These general observations may be separately applied to the

amphitheatre of Titus, which has obtained the name of the

Coliseum, ^49 either from its magnitude, or from Nero's colossal

statue; an edifice, had it been left to time and nature, which

might perhaps have claimed an eternal duration.  The curious

antiquaries, who have computed the numbers and seats, are

disposed to believe, that above the upper row of stone steps the

amphitheatre was encircled and elevated with several stages of

wooden galleries, which were repeatedly consumed by fire, and

restored by the emperors.  Whatever was precious, or portable, or

profane, the statues of gods and heroes, and the costly ornaments

of sculpture which were cast in brass, or overspread with leaves

of silver and gold, became the first prey of conquest or

fanaticism, of the avarice of the Barbarians or the Christians. 

In the massy stones of the Coliseum, many holes are discerned;

and the two most probable conjectures represent the various

accidents of its decay.  These stones were connected by solid

links of brass or iron, nor had the eye of rapine overlooked the

value of the baser metals; ^50 the vacant space was converted

into a fair or market; the artisans of the Coliseum are mentioned

in an ancient survey; and the chasms were perforated or enlarged

to receive the poles that supported the shops or tents of the

mechanic trades. ^51 Reduced to its naked majesty, the Flavian

amphitheatre was contemplated with awe and admiration by the

pilgrims of the North; and their rude enthusiasm broke forth in a

sublime proverbial expression, which is recorded in the eighth

century, in the fragments of the venerable Bede: "As long as the

Coliseum stands, Rome shall stand; when the Coliseum falls, Rome

will fall; when Rome falls, the world will fall." ^52 In the

modern system of war, a situation commanded by three hills would

not be chosen for a fortress; but the strength of the walls and

arches could resist the engines of assault; a numerous garrison

might be lodged in the enclosure; and while one faction occupied

the Vatican and the Capitol, the other was intrenched in the

Lateran and the Coliseum. ^53



[Footnote 49: The fourth part of the Verona Illustrata of the

marquis Maffei professedly treats of amphitheatres, particularly

those of Rome and Verona, of their dimensions, wooden galleries,

&c.  It is from magnitude that he derives the name of Colosseum,

or Coliseum; since the same appellation was applied to the

amphitheatre of Capua, without the aid of a colossal statue;

since that of Nero was erected in the court (in atrio) of his

palace, and not in the Coliseum, (P. iv. p. 15 - 19, l. i. c.

4.)]



[Footnote 50: Joseph Maria Suares, a learned bishop, and the

author of a history of Praeneste, has composed a separate

dissertation on the seven or eight probable causes of these

holes, which has been since reprinted in the Roman Thesaurus of

Sallengre.  Montfaucon (Diarium, p. 233) pronounces the rapine of

the Barbarians to be the unam germanamque causam foraminum. 

     Note: The improbability of this theory is shown by Bunsen,

vol. i. p. 239 - M.]



[Footnote 51: Donatus, Roma Vetus et Nova, p. 285.



     Note: Gibbon has followed Donatus, who supposes that a silk

manufactory was established in the xiith century in the Coliseum.



The Bandonarii, or Bandererii, were the officers who carried the

standards of their school before the pope.  Hobhouse, p. 269. -

M.]



[Footnote 52: Quamdiu stabit Colyseus, stabit et Roma; quando

cadet Coly seus, cadet Roma; quando cadet Roma, cadet et mundus,

(Beda in Excerptis seu Collectaneis apud Ducange Glossar. Med. et

Infimae Latinitatis, tom. ii. p. 407, edit. Basil.) This saying

must be ascribed to the Anglo-Saxon pilgrims who visited Rome

before the year 735 the aera of Bede's death; for I do not

believe that our venerable monk ever passed the sea.]



[Footnote 53: I cannot recover, in Muratori's original Lives of

the Popes, (Script Rerum Italicarum, tom. iii. P. i.,) the

passage that attests this hostile partition, which must be

applied to the end of the xiith or the beginning of the xiith

century.



     Note: "The division is mentioned in Vit. Innocent. Pap. II.

ex Cardinale Aragonio, (Script. Rer. Ital. vol. iii. P. i. p.

435,) and Gibbon might have found frequent other records of it at

other dates." Hobhouse's Illustrations of Childe Harold. p. 130.

- M.]



     The abolition at Rome of the ancient games must be

understood with some latitude; and the carnival sports, of the

Testacean mount and the Circus Agonalis, ^54 were regulated by

the law ^55 or custom of the city.  The senator presided with

dignity and pomp to adjudge and distribute the prizes, the gold

ring, or the pallium, ^56 as it was styled, of cloth or silk.  A

tribute on the Jews supplied the annual expense; ^57 and the

races, on foot, on horseback, or in chariots, were ennobled by a

tilt and tournament of seventy-two of the Roman youth.  In the

year one thousand three hundred and thirty-two, a bull-feast,

after the fashion of the Moors and Spaniards, was celebrated in

the Coliseum itself; and the living manners are painted in a

diary of the times. ^58 A convenient order of benches was

restored; and a general proclamation, as far as Rimini and

Ravenna, invited the nobles to exercise their skill and courage

in this perilous adventure.  The Roman ladies were marshalled in

three squadrons, and seated in three balconies, which, on this

day, the third of September, were lined with scarlet cloth. The

fair Jacova di Rovere led the matrons from beyond the Tyber, a

pure and native race, who still represent the features and

character of antiquity. The remainder of the city was divided as

usual between the Colonna and Ursini: the two factions were proud

of the number and beauty of their female bands: the charms of

Savella Ursini are mentioned with praise; and the Colonna

regretted the absence of the youngest of their house, who had

sprained her ankle in the garden of Nero's tower.  The lots of

the champions were drawn by an old and respectable citizen; and

they descended into the arena, or pit, to encounter the wild

bulls, on foot as it should seem, with a single spear.  Amidst

the crowd, our annalist has selected the names, colors, and

devices, of twenty of the most conspicuous knights.  Several of

the names are the most illustrious of Rome and the ecclesiastical

state: Malatesta, Polenta, della Valle, Cafarello, Savelli,

Capoccio, Conti, Annibaldi, Altieri, Corsi: the colors were

adapted to their taste and situation; the devices are expressive

of hope or despair, and breathe the spirit of gallantry and arms.



"I am alone, like the youngest of the Horatii," the confidence of

an intrepid stranger: "I live disconsolate," a weeping widower:

"I burn under the ashes," a discreet lover: "I adore Lavinia, or

Lucretia," the ambiguous declaration of a modern passion: "My

faith is as pure," the motto of a white livery: "Who is stronger

than myself?" of a lion's hide: "If am drowned in blood, what a

pleasant death!" the wish of ferocious courage.  The pride or

prudence of the Ursini restrained them from the field, which was

occupied by three of their hereditary rivals, whose inscriptions

denoted the lofty greatness of the Colonna name: "Though sad, I

am strong:" "Strong as I am great:" "If I fall," addressing

himself to the spectators, "you fall with me;" - intimating (says

the contemporary writer) that while the other families were the

subjects of the Vatican, they alone were the supporters of the

Capitol.  The combats of the amphitheatre were dangerous and

bloody.  Every champion successively encountered a wild bull; and

the victory may be ascribed to the quadrupeds, since no more than

eleven were left on the field, with the loss of nine wounded and

eighteen killed on the side of their adversaries.  Some of the

noblest families might mourn, but the pomp of the funerals, in

the churches of St. John Lateran and St. Maria Maggiore, afforded

a second holiday to the people.  Doubtless it was not in such

conflicts that the blood of the Romans should have been shed;

yet, in blaming their rashness, we are compelled to applaud their

gallantry; and the noble volunteers, who display their

magnificence, and risk their lives, under the balconies of the

fair, excite a more generous sympathy than the thousands of

captives and malefactors who were reluctantly dragged to the

scene of slaughter. ^59



[Footnote 54: Although the structure of the circus Agonalis be

destroyed, it still retains its form and name, (Agona, Nagona,

Navona;) and the interior space affords a sufficient level for

the purpose of racing.  But the Monte Testaceo, that strange pile

of broken pottery, seems only adapted for the annual practice of

hurling from top to bottom some wagon-loads of live hogs for the

diversion of the populace, (Statuta Urbis Romae, p. 186.)] 

[Footnote 55: See the Statuta Urbis Romae, l. iii. c. 87, 88, 89,

p. 185, 186. I have already given an idea of this municipal code.



The races of Nagona and Monte Testaceo are likewise mentioned in

the Diary of Peter Antonius from 1404 to 1417, (Muratori, Script.

Rerum Italicarum, tom. xxiv. p. 1124.)] 

[Footnote 56: The Pallium, which Menage so foolishly derives from

Palmarius, is an easy extension of the idea and the words, from

the robe or cloak, to the materials, and from thence to their

application as a prize, (Muratori, dissert. xxxiii.)]



[Footnote 57: For these expenses, the Jews of Rome paid each year

1130 florins, of which the odd thirty represented the pieces of

silver for which Judas had betrayed his Master to their

ancestors.  There was a foot-race of Jewish as well as of

Christian youths, (Statuta Urbis, ibidem.)] 

[Footnote 58: This extraordinary bull-feast in the Coliseum is

described, from tradition rather than memory, by Ludovico

Buonconte Monaldesco, on the most ancient fragments of Roman

annals, (Muratori, Script Rerum Italicarum, tom. xii. p. 535,

536;) and however fanciful they may seem, they are deeply marked

with the colors of truth and nature.]



[Footnote 59: Muratori has given a separate dissertation (the

xxixth) to the games of the Italians in the Middle Ages.]



     This use of the amphitheatre was a rare, perhaps a singular,

festival: the demand for the materials was a daily and continual

want which the citizens could gratify without restraint or

remorse.  In the fourteenth century, a scandalous act of concord

secured to both factions the privilege of extracting stones from

the free and common quarry of the Coliseum; ^60 and Poggius

laments, that the greater part of these stones had been burnt to

lime by the folly of the Romans. ^61 To check this abuse, and to

prevent the nocturnal crimes that might be perpetrated in the

vast and gloomy recess, Eugenius the Fourth surrounded it with a

wall; and, by a charter long extant, granted both the ground and

edifice to the monks of an adjacent convent. ^62 After his death,

the wall was overthrown in a tumult of the people; and had they

themselves respected the noblest monument of their fathers, they

might have justified the resolve that it should never be degraded

to private property. The inside was damaged: but in the middle of

the sixteenth century, an aera of taste and learning, the

exterior circumference of one thousand six hundred and twelve

feet was still entire and inviolate; a triple elevation of

fourscore arches, which rose to the height of one hundred and

eight feet.  Of the present ruin, the nephews of Paul the Third

are the guilty agents; and every traveller who views the Farnese

palace may curse the sacrilege and luxury of these upstart

princes. ^63 A similar reproach is applied to the Barberini; and

the repetition of injury might be dreaded from every reign, till

the Coliseum was placed under the safeguard of religion by the

most liberal of the pontiffs, Benedict the Fourteenth, who

consecrated a spot which persecution and fable had stained with

the blood of so many Christian martyrs. ^64 

[Footnote 60: In a concise but instructive memoir, the abbe

Barthelemy (Memoires de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxviii.

p. 585) has mentioned this agreement of the factions of the xivth

century de Tiburtino faciendo in the Coliseum, from an original

act in the archives of Rome.] 

[Footnote 61: Coliseum . . . . ob stultitiam Romanorum majori ex

parte ad cal cem deletum, says the indignant Poggius, (p. 17:)

but his expression too strong for the present age, must be very

tenderly applied to the xvth century.]



[Footnote 62: Of the Olivetan monks.  Montfaucon (p. 142) affirms

this fact from the memorials of Flaminius Vacca, (No. 72.) They

still hoped on some future occasion, to revive and vindicate

their grant.]



[Footnote 63: After measuring the priscus amphitheatri gyrus,

Montfaucon (p. 142) only adds that it was entire under Paul III.;

tacendo clamat.  Muratori (Annali d'Italia, tom. xiv. p. 371)

more freely reports the guilt of the Farnese pope, and the

indignation of the Roman people.  Against the nephews of Urban

VIII.  I have no other evidence than the vulgar saying, "Quod non

fecerunt Barbari, fecere Barberini," which was perhaps suggested

by the resemblance of the words.]



[Footnote 64: As an antiquarian and a priest, Montfaucon thus

deprecates the ruin of the Coliseum: Quod si non suopte merito

atque pulchritudine dignum fuisset quod improbas arceret manus,

indigna res utique in locum tot martyrum cruore sacrum tantopere

saevitum esse.]



     When Petrarch first gratified his eyes with a view of those

monuments, whose scattered fragments so far surpass the most

eloquent descriptions, he was astonished at the supine

indifference ^65 of the Romans themselves; ^66 he was humbled

rather than elated by the discovery, that, except his friend

Rienzi, and one of the Colonna, a stranger of the Rhone was more

conversant with these antiquities than the nobles and natives of

the metropolis. ^67 The ignorance and credulity of the Romans are

elaborately displayed in the old survey of the city which was

composed about the beginning of the thirteenth century; and,

without dwelling on the manifold errors of name and place, the

legend of the Capitol ^68 may provoke a smile of contempt and

indignation. "The Capitol," says the anonymous writer, "is so

named as being the head of the world; where the consuls and

senators formerly resided for the government of the city and the

globe.  The strong and lofty walls were covered with glass and

gold, and crowned with a roof of the richest and most curious

carving. Below the citadel stood a palace, of gold for the

greatest part, decorated with precious stones, and whose value

might be esteemed at one third of the world itself.  The statues

of all the provinces were arranged in order, each with a small

bell suspended from its neck; and such was the contrivance of art

magic, ^69 that if the province rebelled against Rome, the statue

turned round to that quarter of the heavens, the bell rang, the

prophet of the Capitol repeated the prodigy, and the senate was

admonished of the impending danger." A second example, of less

importance, though of equal absurdity, may be drawn from the two

marble horses, led by two naked youths, who have since been

transported from the baths of Constantine to the Quirinal hill. 

The groundless application of the names of Phidias and Praxiteles

may perhaps be excused; but these Grecian sculptors should not

have been removed above four hundred years from the age of

Pericles to that of Tiberius; they should not have been

transferred into two philosophers or magicians, whose nakedness

was the symbol of truth or knowledge, who revealed to the emperor

his most secret actions; and, after refusing all pecuniary

recompense, solicited the honor of leaving this eternal monument

of themselves. ^70 Thus awake to the power of magic, the Romans

were insensible to the beauties of art: no more than five statues

were visible to the eyes of Poggius; and of the multitudes which

chance or design had buried under the ruins, the resurrection was

fortunately delayed till a safer and more enlightened age. ^71

The Nile which now adorns the Vatican, had been explored by some

laborers in digging a vineyard near the temple, or convent, of

the Minerva; but the impatient proprietor, who was tormented by

some visits of curiosity, restored the unprofitable marble to its

former grave. ^72 The discovery of a statue of Pompey, ten feet

in length, was the occasion of a lawsuit.  It had been found

under a partition wall: the equitable judge had pronounced, that

the head should be separated from the body to satisfy the claims

of the contiguous owners; and the sentence would have been

executed, if the intercession of a cardinal, and the liberality

of a pope, had not rescued the Roman hero from the hands of his

barbarous countrymen. ^73



[Footnote 65: Yet the statutes of Rome (l. iii. c. 81, p. 182)

impose a fine of 500 aurei on whosoever shall demolish any

ancient edifice, ne ruinis civitas deformetur, et ut antiqua

aedificia decorem urbis perpetuo representent.]



[Footnote 66: In his first visit to Rome (A.D. 1337.  See

Memoires sur Petrarque, tom. i. p. 322, &c.) Petrarch is struck

mute miraculo rerumtantarum, et stuporis mole obrutus . . . .

Praesentia vero, mirum dictu nihil imminuit: vere major fuit Roma

majoresque sunt reliquiae quam rebar. Jam non orbem ab hac urbe

domitum, sed tam sero domitum, miror, (Opp. p. 605, Familiares,

ii. 14, Joanni Columnae.)]



[Footnote 67: He excepts and praises the rare knowledge of John

Colonna.  Qui enim hodie magis ignari rerum Romanarum, quam

Romani cives!  Invitus dico, nusquam minus Roma cognoscitur quam

Romae.]



[Footnote 68: After the description of the Capitol, he adds,

statuae erant quot sunt mundi provinciae; et habebat quaelibet

tintinnabulum ad collum. Et erant ita per magicam artem

dispositae, ut quando aliqua regio Romano Imperio rebellis erat,

statim imago illius provinciae vertebat se contra illam; unde

tintinnabulum resonabat quod pendebat ad collum; tuncque vates

Capitolii qui erant custodes senatui, &c.  He mentions an example

of the Saxons and Suevi, who, after they had been subdued by

Agrippa, again rebelled: tintinnabulum sonuit; sacerdos qui erat

in speculo in hebdomada senatoribus nuntiavit: Agrippa marched

back and reduced the - Persians, (Anonym. in Montfaucon, p. 297,

298.)]



[Footnote 69: The same writer affirms, that Virgil captus a

Romanis invisibiliter exiit, ivitque Neapolim.  A Roman magician,

in the xith century, is introduced by William of Malmsbury, (de

Gestis Regum Anglorum, l. ii. p. 86;) and in the time of

Flaminius Vacca (No. 81, 103) it was the vulgar belief that the

strangers (the Goths) invoked the daemons for the discovery of

hidden treasures.]



[Footnote 70: Anonym. p. 289.  Montfaucon (p. 191) justly

observes, that if Alexander be represented, these statues cannot

be the work of Phidias (Olympiad lxxxiii.) or Praxiteles,

(Olympiad civ.,) who lived before that conqueror (Plin. Hist.

Natur. xxxiv. 19.)]



[Footnote 71: William of Malmsbury (l. ii. p. 86, 87) relates a

marvellous discovery (A.D. 1046) of Pallas the son of Evander,

who had been slain by Turnus; the perpetual light in his

sepulchre, a Latin epitaph, the corpse, yet entire, of a young

giant, the enormous wound in his breast, (pectus perforat

ingens,) &c.  If this fable rests on the slightest foundation, we

may pity the bodies, as well as the statues, that were exposed to

the air in a barbarous age.]



[Footnote 72: Prope porticum Minervae, statua est recubantis,

cujus caput integra effigie tantae magnitudinis, ut signa omnia

excedat.  Quidam ad plantandas arbores scrobes faciens detexit. 

Ad hoc visendum cum plures in dies magis concurrerent, strepitum

adeuentium fastidiumque vertaesus, horti patronus congesta humo

texit, (Poggius de Varietate Fortunae, p. 12.)] 

[Footnote 73: See the Memorials of Flaminius Vacca, No. 57, p.

11, 12, at the end of the Roma Antica of Nardini, (1704, in

4to).]



     But the clouds of barbarism were gradually dispelled; and

the peaceful authority of Martin the Fifth and his successors

restored the ornaments of the city as well as the order of the

ecclesiastical state.  The improvements of Rome, since the

fifteenth century, have not been the spontaneous produce of

freedom and industry.  The first and most natural root of a great

city is the labor and populousness of the adjacent country, which

supplies the materials of subsistence, of manufactures, and of

foreign trade.  But the greater part of the Campagna of Rome is

reduced to a dreary and desolate wilderness: the overgrown

estates of the princes and the clergy are cultivated by the lazy

hands of indigent and hopeless vassals; and the scanty harvests

are confined or exported for the benefit of a monopoly.  A second

and more artificial cause of the growth of a metropolis is the

residence of a monarch, the expense of a luxurious court, and the

tributes of dependent provinces.  Those provinces and tributes

had been lost in the fall of the empire; and if some streams of

the silver of Peru and the gold of Brazil have been attracted by

the Vatican, the revenues of the cardinals, the fees of office,

the oblations of pilgrims and clients, and the remnant of

ecclesiastical taxes, afford a poor and precarious supply, which

maintains, however, the idleness of the court and city.  The

population of Rome, far below the measure of the great capitals

of Europe, does not exceed one hundred and seventy thousand

inhabitants; ^74 and within the spacious enclosure of the walls,

the largest portion of the seven hills is overspread with

vineyards and ruins.  The beauty and splendor of the modern city

may be ascribed to the abuses of the government, to the influence

of superstition. Each reign (the exceptions are rare) has been

marked by the rapid elevation of a new family, enriched by the

childish pontiff at the expense of the church and country.  The

palaces of these fortunate nephews are the most costly monuments

of elegance and servitude: the perfect arts of architecture,

sculpture, and painting, have been prostituted in their service;

and their galleries and gardens are decorated with the most

precious works of antiquity, which taste or vanity has prompted

them to collect.  The ecclesiastical revenues were more decently

employed by the popes themselves in the pomp of the Catholic

worship; but it is superfluous to enumerate their pious

foundations of altars, chapels, and churches, since these lesser

stars are eclipsed by the sun of the Vatican, by the dome of St.

Peter, the most glorious structure that ever has been applied to

the use of religion.  The fame of Julius the Second, Leo the

Tenth, and Sixtus the Fifth, is accompanied by the superior merit

of Bramante and Fontana, of Raphael and Michael Angelo; and the

same munificence which had been displayed in palaces and temples

was directed with equal zeal to revive and emulate the labors of

antiquity. Prostrate obelisks were raised from the ground, and

erected in the most conspicuous places; of the eleven aqueducts

of the Caesars and consuls, three were restored; the artificial

rivers were conducted over a long series of old, or of new

arches, to discharge into marble basins a flood of salubrious and

refreshing waters: and the spectator, impatient to ascend the

steps of St. Peter's, is detained by a column of Egyptian

granite, which rises between two lofty and perpetual fountains,

to the height of one hundred and twenty feet. The map, the

description, the monuments of ancient Rome, have been elucidated

by the diligence of the antiquarian and the student: ^75 and the

footsteps of heroes, the relics, not of superstition, but of

empire, are devoutly visited by a new race of pilgrims from the

remote, and once savage countries of the North.



[Footnote 74: In the year 1709, the inhabitants of Rome (without

including eight or ten thousand Jews,) amounted to 138,568 souls,

(Labat Voyages en Espagne et en Italie, tom. iii. p. 217, 218.)

In 1740, they had increased to 146,080; and in 1765, I left them,

without the Jews 161,899.  I am ignorant whether they have since

continued in a progressive state.] 



[Footnote 75: The Pere Montfaucon distributes his own

observations into twenty days; he should have styled them weeks,

or months, of his visits to the different parts of the city,

(Diarium Italicum, c. 8 - 20, p. 104 - 301.) That learned

Benedictine reviews the topographers of ancient Rome; the first

efforts of Blondus, Fulvius, Martianus, and Faunus, the superior

labors of Pyrrhus Ligorius, had his learning been equal to his

labors; the writings of Onuphrius Panvinius, qui omnes

obscuravit, and the recent but imperfect books of Donatus and

Nardini.  Yet Montfaucon still sighs for a more complete plan and

description of the old city, which must be attained by the three

following methods: 1. The measurement of the space and intervals

of the ruins.  2. The study of inscriptions, and the places where

they were found. 3. The investigation of all the acts, charters,

diaries of the middle ages, which name any spot or building of

Rome.  The laborious work, such as Montfaucon desired, must be

promoted by princely or public munificence: but the great modern

plan of Nolli (A.D. 1748) would furnish a solid and accurate

basis for the ancient topography of Rome.]



     Of these pilgrims, and of every reader, the attention will

be excited by a History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman

Empire; the greatest, perhaps, and most awful scene in the

history of mankind.  The various causes and progressive effects

are connected with many of the events most interesting in human

annals: the artful policy of the Caesars, who long maintained the

name and image of a free republic; the disorders of military

despotism; the rise, establishment, and sects of Christianity;

the foundation of Constantinople; the division of the monarchy;

the invasion and settlements of the Barbarians of Germany and

Scythia; the institutions of the civil law; the character and

religion of Mahomet; the temporal sovereignty of the popes; the

restoration and decay of the Western empire of Charlemagne; the

crusades of the Latins in the East: the conquests of the Saracens

and Turks; the ruin of the Greek empire; the state and

revolutions of Rome in the middle age. The historian may applaud

the importance and variety of his subject; but while he is

conscious of his own imperfections, he must often accuse the

deficiency of his materials.  It was among the ruins of the

Capitol that I first conceived the idea of a work which has

amused and exercised near twenty years of my life, and which,

however inadequate to my own wishes, I finally delivered to the

curiosity and candor of the public.



Lausanne, June 27 1787











End
