




                                Book IV

                                   1



    We have now treated, in regard to blooded animals of the parts

they have in common and of the parts peculiar to this genus or that,

and of the parts both composite and simple, whether without or within.

We now proceed to treat of animals devoid of blood. These animals

are divided into several genera.

    One genus consists of so-called 'molluscs'; and by the term

'mollusc' we mean an animal that, being devoid of blood, has its

flesh-like substance outside, and any hard structure it may happen

to have, inside-in this respect resembling the red-blooded animals,

such as the genus of the cuttle-fish.

    Another genus is that of the malacostraca. These are animals

that have their hard structure outside, and their soft or fleshlike

substance inside, and the hard substance belonging to them has to be

crushed rather than shattered; and to this genus belongs the

crawfish and the crab.

    A third genus is that of the ostracoderms or 'testaceans'. These

are animals that have their hard substance outside and their

flesh-like substance within, and their hard substance can be shattered

but not crushed; and to this genus belong the snail and the oyster.

    The fourth genus is that of insects; and this genus comprehends

numerous and dissimilar species. Insects are creatures that, as the

name implies, have nicks either on the belly or on the back, or on

both belly and back, and have no one part distinctly osseous and no

one part distinctly fleshy, but are throughout a something

intermediate between bone and flesh; that is to say, their body is

hard all through, inside and outside. Some insects are wingless,

such as the iulus and the centipede; some are winged, as the bee,

the cockchafer, and the wasp; and the same kind is in some cases

both winged and wingless, as the ant and the glow-worm.

    In molluscs the external parts are as follows: in the first place,

the so-called feet; secondly, and attached to these, the head;

thirdly, the mantle-sac, containing the internal parts, and

incorrectly designated by some writers the head; and, fourthly, fins

round about the sac. (See diagram.) In all molluscs the head is found

to be between the feet and the belly. All molluscs are furnished with

eight feet, and in all cases these feet are severally furnished with

a double row of suckers, with the exception of one single species of

poulpe or octopus. The sepia, the small calamary and the large

calamary have an exceptional organ in a pair of long arms or

tentacles, having at their extremities a portion rendered rough by

the presence of two rows of suckers; and with these arms or tentacles

they apprehend their food and draw it into their mouths, and in

stormy weather they cling by them to a rock and sway about in the

rough water like ships lying at anchor. They swim by the aid of the

fins that they have about the sac. In all cases their feet are

furnished with suckers.

    The octopus, by the way, uses his feelers either as feet or hands;

with the two which stand over his mouth he draws in food, and the last

of his feelers he employs in the act of copulation; and this last one,

by the way, is extremely sharp, is exceptional as being of a whitish

colour, and at its extremity is bifurcate; that is to say, it has an

additional something on the rachis, and by rachis is meant the

smooth surface or edge of the arm on the far side from the suckers.

(See diagram.)

    In front of the sac and over the feelers they have a hollow

tube, by means of which they discharge any sea-water that they may

have taken into the sac of the body in the act of receiving food by

the mouth. They can shift the tube from side to side, and by means

of it they discharge the black liquid peculiar to the animal.

    Stretching out its feet, it swims obliquely in the direction of

the so-called head, and by this mode of swimming it can see in

front, for its eyes are at the top, and in this attitude it has its

mouth at the rear. The 'head', while the creature is alive, is hard,

and looks as though it were inflated. It apprehends and retains

objects by means of the under-surface of its arms, and the membrane in

between its feet is kept at full tension; if the animal get on to

the sand it can no longer retain its hold.

    There is a difference between the octopus and the other molluscs

above mentioned: the body of the octopus is small, and his feet are

long, whereas in the others the body is large and the feet short; so

short, in fact, that they cannot walk on them. Compared with one

another, the teuthis, or calamary, is long-shaped, and the sepia

flat-shaped; and of the calamaries the so-called teuthus is much

bigger than the teuthis; for teuthi have been found as much as five

ells long. Some sepiae attain a length of two ells, and the feelers of

the octopus are sometimes as long, or even longer. The species teuthus

is not a numerous one; the teuthus differs from the teuthis in

shape; that is, the sharp extremity of the teuthus is broader than

that of the other, and, further, the encircling fin goes all round the

trunk, whereas it is in part lacking in the teuthis; both animals

are pelagic.

    In all cases the head comes after the feet, in the middle of the

feet that are called arms or feelers. There is here situated a

mouth, and two teeth in the mouth; and above these two large eyes, and

betwixt the eyes a small cartilage enclosing a small brain; and within

the mouth it has a minute organ of a fleshy nature, and this it uses

as a tongue, for no other tongue does it possess. Next after this,

on the outside, is what looks like a sac; the flesh of which it is

made is divisible, not in long straight strips, but in annular flakes;

and all molluscs have a cuticle around this flesh. Next after or at

the back of the mouth comes a long and narrow oesophagus, and close

after that a crop or craw, large and spherical, like that of a bird;

then comes the stomach, like the fourth stomach in ruminants; and

the shape of it resembles the spiral convolution in the trumpet-shell;

from the stomach there goes back again, in the direction of the mouth,

thin gut, and the gut is thicker than the oesophagus. (See diagram.)

    Molluscs have no viscera, but they have what is called a

mytis, and on it a vessel containing a thick black juice; in the sepia

or cuttle-fish this vessel is the largest, and this juice is most

abundant. All molluscs, when frightened, discharge such a juice, but

the discharge is most copious in the cuttle-fish. The mytis, then,

is situated under the mouth, and the oesophagus runs through it; and

down below at the point to which the gut extends is the vesicle of the

black juice, and the animal has the vesicle and the gut enveloped in

one and the same membrane, and by the same membrane, same orifice

discharges both the black juice and the residuum. The animals have

also certain hair-like or furry growths in their bodies.

    In the sepia, the teuthis, and the teuthus the hard parts are

within, towards the back of the body; those parts are called in one

the sepium, and in the other the 'sword'. They differ from one

another, for the sepium in the cuttle-fish and teuthus is hard and

flat, being a substance intermediate between bone and fishbone, with

(in part) a crumbling, spongy texture, but in the teuthis the part

is thin and somewhat gristly. These parts differ from one another in

shape, as do also the bodies of the animals. The octopus has nothing

hard of this kind in its interior, but it has a gristly substance

round the head, which, if the animal grows old, becomes hard.

    The females differ from the males. The males have a duct in

under the oesophagus, extending from the mantle-cavity to the lower

portion of the sac, and there is an organ to which it attaches,

resembling a breast; (see diagram) in the female there are two of

these organs, situated higher up; (see diagram) with both sexes there

are underneath these organs certain red formations. The egg of the

octopus is single, uneven on its surface, and of large size; the

fluid substance within is all uniform in colour, smooth, and in

colour white; the size of the egg is so great as to fill a vessel

larger than the creature's head. The sepia has two sacs, and inside

them a number of eggs, like in appearance to white hailstones. For

the disposition of these parts I must refer to my anatomical

diagrams.

    The males of all these animals differ from the females, and the

difference between the sexes is most marked in the sepia; for the back

of the trunk, which is blacker than the belly, is rougher in the

male than in the female, and in the male the back is striped, and

the rump is more sharply pointed.

    There are several species of the octopus. One keeps close to the

surface, and is the largest of them all, and near the shore the size

is larger than in deep water; and there are others, small,

variegated in colour, which are not articles of food. There are two

others, one called the heledone, which differs from its congeners in

the length of its legs and in having one row of suckers-all the rest

of the molluscs having two,-the other nicknamed variously the

bolitaina or the 'onion,' and the ozolis or the 'stinkard'.

    There are two others found in shells resembling those of the

testaceans. One of them is nicknamed by some persons the nautilus or

the pontilus, or by others the 'polypus' egg'; and the shell of this

creature is something like a separate valve of a deep scallop-shell.

This polypus lives very often near to the shore, and is apt to be

thrown up high and dry on the beach; under these circumstances it is

found with its shell detached, and dies by and by on dry land. These

polypods are small, and are shaped, as regards the form of their

bodies, like the bolbidia. There is another polypus that is placed

within a shell like a snail; it never comes out of the shell, but

lives inside the shell like the snail, and from time to time protrudes

its feelers.

    So much for molluscs.

                                   2



    With regard to the Malacostraca or crustaceans, one species is

that of the crawfish, and a second, resembling the first, is that of

the lobster; the lobster differing from the crawfish in having

claws, and in a few other respects as well. Another species is that of

the carid, and another is that of the crab, and there are many kinds

both of carid and of crab.

    Of carids there are the so-called cyphae, or 'hunch-backs', the

crangons, or squillae, and the little kind, or shrimps, and the little

kind do not develop into a larger kind.

    Of the crab, the varieties are indefinite and incalculable. The

largest of all crabs is one nicknamed Maia, a second variety is the

pagarus and the crab of Heracleotis, and a third variety is the

fresh-water crab; the other varieties are smaller in size and

destitute of special designations. In the neighbourhood of Phoenice

there are found on the beach certain crabs that are nicknamed the

'horsemen', from their running with such speed that it is difficult to

overtake them; these crabs, when opened, are usually found empty,

and this emptiness may be put down to insufficiency of nutriment.

(There is another variety, small like the crab, but resembling in

shape the lobster.) All these animals, as has been stated, have

their hard and shelly part outside, where the skin is in other

animals, and the fleshy part inside; and the belly is more or less

provided with lamellae, or little flaps, and the female here

deposits her spawn.

    The crawfishes have five feet on either side, including the

claws at the end; and in like manner the crabs have ten feet in all,

including the claws. Of the carids, the hunch-backed, or prawns,

have five feet on either side, which are sharp-pointed-those towards

the head; and five others on either side in the region of the belly,

with their extremities flat; they are devoid of flaps on the under

side such as the crawfish has, but on the back they resemble the

crawfish. (See diagram.)It is very different with the crangon, or

squilla; it has four front legs on either side, then three thin ones

close behind on either side, and the rest of the body is for the most

part devoid of feet. (See diagram.) Of all these animals the feet

bend out obliquely, as is the case with insects; and the claws, where

claws are found, turn inwards. The crawfish has a tail, and five fins

on it; and the round-backed carid has a tail and four fins; the

squilla also has fins at the tail on either side. In the case of both

the hump-backed carid and the squilla the middle art of the tail is

spinous: only that in the squilla the part is flattened and in the

carid it is sharp-pointed. Of all animals of this genus the crab is

the only one devoid of a rump; and, while the body of the carid and

the crawfish is elongated, that of the crab is rotund.

    In the crawfish the male differs from the female: in the female

the first foot is bifurcate, in the male it is undivided; the

belly-fins in the female are large and overlapping on the neck,

while in the male they are smaller and do not overlap; and, further,

on the last feet of the male there are spur-like projections, large

and sharp, which projections in the female are small and smooth.

Both male and female have two antennae in front of the eyes, large and

rough, and other antennae underneath, small and smooth. The eyes of

all these creatures are hard and beady, and can move either to the

inner or to the outer side. The eyes of most crabs have a similar

facility of movement, or rather, in the crab this facility is

developed in a higher degree. (See diagram.)

    The lobster is all over grey-coloured, with a mottling of black.

Its under or hinder feet, up to the big feet or claws, are eight in

number; then come the big feet, far larger and flatter at the tips

than the same organs in the crawfish; and these big feet or claws

are exceptional in their structure, for the right claw has the extreme

flat surface long and thin, while the left claw has the

corresponding surface thick and round. Each of the two claws,

divided at the end like a pair of jaws, has both below and above a set

of teeth: only that in the right claw they are all small and

saw-shaped, while in the left claw those at the apex are saw-shaped

and those within are molar-shaped, these latter being, in the under

part of the cleft claw, four teeth close together, and in the upper

part three teeth, not close together. Both right and left claws have

the upper part mobile, and bring it to bear against the lower one, and

both are curved like bandy-legs, being thereby adapted for

apprehension and constriction. Above the two large claws come two

others, covered with hair, a little underneath the mouth; and

underneath these the gill-like formations in the region of the

mouth, hairy and numerous. These organs the animal keeps in

perpetual motion; and the two hairy feet it bends and draws in towards

its mouth. The feet near the mouth are furnished also with delicate

outgrowing appendages. Like the crawfish, the lobster has two teeth,

or mandibles, and above these teeth are its antennae, long, but

shorter and finer by far than those of the crawfish, and then four

other antennae similar in shape, but shorter and finer than the

others. Over these antennae come the eyes, small and short, not

large like the eyes of the crawfish. Over the eyes is a peaky rough

projection like a forehead, larger than the same part in the crawfish;

in fact, the frontal part is more pointed and the thorax is much

broader in the lobster than in the crawfish, and the body in general

is smoother and more full of flesh. Of the eight feet, four are

bifurcate at the extremities, and four are undivided. The region of

the so-called neck is outwardly divided into five divisions, and

sixthly comes the flattened portion at the end, and this portion has

five flaps, or tail-fins; and the inner or under parts, into which the

female drops her spawn, are four in number and hairy, and on each of

the aforesaid parts is a spine turned outwards, short and straight.

The body in general and the region of the thorax in particular are

smooth, not rough as in the crawfish; but on the large claws the outer

portion has larger spines. There is no apparent difference between the

male and female, for they both have one claw, whichever it may be,

larger than the other, and neither male nor female is ever found

with both claws of the same size.

    All crustaceans take in water close by the mouth. The crab

discharges it, closing up, as it does so, a small portion of the same,

and the crawfish discharges it by way of the gills; and, by the way,

the gill-shaped organs in the crawfish are very numerous.

    The following properties are common to all crustaceans: they

have in all cases two teeth, or mandibles (for the front teeth in

the crawfish are two in number), and in all cases there is in the

mouth a small fleshy structure serving for a tongue; and the stomach

is close to the mouth, only that the crawfish has a little

oesophagus in front of the stomach, and there is a straight gut

attached to it. This gut, in the crawfish and its congeners, and in

the carids, extends in a straight line to the tail, and terminates

where the animal discharges the residuum, and where the female

deposits her spawn; in the crab it terminates where the flap is

situated, and in the centre of the flap. (And by the way, in all these

animals the spawn is deposited outside.) Further, the female has the

place for the spawn running along the gut. And, again, all these

animals have, more or less, an organ termed the 'mytis', or

'poppyjuice'.

    We must now proceed to review their several differentiae.

    The crawfish then, as has been said, has two teeth, large and

hollow, in which is contained a juice resembling the mytis, and in

between the teeth is a fleshy substance, shaped like a tongue. After

the mouth comes a short oesophagus, and then a membranous stomach

attached to the oesophagus, and at the orifice Of the stomach are

three teeth, two facing one another and a third standing by itself

underneath. Coming off at a bend from the stomach is a gut, simple and

of equal thickness throughout the entire length of the body until it

reaches the anal vent.

    These are all common properties of the crawfish, the carid, and

the crab; for the crab, be it remembered, has two teeth.

    Again, the crawfish has a duct attached all the way from the chest

to the anal vent; and this duct is connected with the ovary in the

female, and with the seminal ducts in the male. This passage is

attached to the concave surface of the flesh in such a way that the

flesh is in betwixt the duct and the gut; for the gut is related to

the convexity and this duct to the concavity, pretty much as is

observed in quadrupeds. And the duct is identical in both the sexes;

that is to say, the duct in both is thin and white, and charged with a

sallow-coloured moisture, and is attached to the chest.

    (The following are the properties of the egg and of the convolutes

in the carid.)

    The male, by the way, differs from the female in regard to its

flesh, in having in connexion with the chest two separate and distinct

white substances, resembling in colour and conformation the

tentacles of the cuttle-fish, and they are convoluted like the 'poppy'

or quasi-liver of the trumpet-shell. These organs have their

starting-point in 'cotyledons' or papillae, which are situated under

the hindmost feet; and hereabouts the flesh is red and blood-coloured,

but is slippery to the touch and in so far unlike flesh. Off from

the convolute organ at the chest branches off another coil about as

thick as ordinary twine; and underneath there are two granular seminal

bodies in juxta-position with the gut. These are the organs of the

male. The female has red-coloured eggs, which are adjacent to the

stomach and to each side of the gut all along to the fleshy parts,

being enveloped in a thin membrane.

    Such are the parts, internal and external, of the carid.

                                   3



    The inner organs of sanguineous animals happen to have specific

designations; for these animals have in all cases the inner viscera,

but this is not the case with the bloodless animals, but what they

have in common with red-blooded animals is the stomach, the

oesophagus, and the gut.

    With regard to the crab, it has already been stated that it has

claws and feet, and their position has been set forth; furthermore,

for the most part they have the right claw bigger and stronger than

the left. It has also been stated' that in general the eyes of the

crab look sideways. Further, the trunk of the crab's body is single

and undivided, including its head and any other part it may possess.

Some crabs have eyes placed sideways on the upper part, immediately

under the back, and standing a long way apart, and some have their

eyes in the centre and close together, like the crabs of Heracleotis

and the so-called 'grannies'. The mouth lies underneath the eyes,

and inside it there are two teeth, as is the case with the crawfish,

only that in the crab the teeth are not rounded but long; and over the

teeth are two lids, and in betwixt them are structures such as the

crawfish has besides its teeth. The crab takes in water near by the

mouth, using the lids as a check to the inflow, and discharges the

water by two passages above the mouth, closing by means of the lids

the way by which it entered; and the two passage-ways are underneath

the eyes. When it has taken in water it closes its mouth by means of

both lids, and ejects the water in the way above described. Next after

the teeth comes the oesophagus, very short, so short in fact that

the stomach seems to come straightway after the mouth. Next after

the oesophagus comes the stomach, two-horned, to the centre of which

is attached a simple and delicate gut; and the gut terminates

outwards, at the operculum, as has been previously stated. (The crab

has the parts in between the lids in the neighbourhood of the teeth

similar to the same parts in the crawfish.) Inside the trunk is a

sallow juice and some few little bodies, long and white, and others

spotted red. The male differs from the female in size and breadth, and

in respect of the ventral flap; for this is larger in the female

than in the male, and stands out further from the trunk, and is more

hairy (as is the case also with the female in the crawfish).

    So much, then, for the organs of the malacostraca or crustacea.

                                   4



    With the ostracoderma, or testaceans, such as the land-snails

and the sea-snails, and all the 'oysters' so-called, and also with the

sea-urchin genus, the fleshy part, in such as have flesh, is similarly

situated to the fleshy part in the crustaceans; in other words, it

is inside the animal, and the shell is outside, and there is no hard

substance in the interior. As compared with one another the testaceans

present many diversities both in regard to their shells and to the

flesh within. Some of them have no flesh at all, as the sea-urchin;

others have flesh, but it is inside and wholly hidden, except the

head, as in the land-snails, and the so-called cocalia, and, among

pelagic animals, in the purple murex, the ceryx or trumpet-shell,

the sea-snail, and the spiral-shaped testaceans in general. Of the

rest, some are bivalved and some univalved; and by 'bivalves' I mean

such as are enclosed within two shells, and by 'univalved' such as are

enclosed within a single shell, and in these last the fleshy part is

exposed, as in the case of the limpet. Of the bivalves, some can

open out, like the scallop and the mussel; for all such shells are

grown together on one side and are separate on the other, so as to

open and shut. Other bivalves are closed on both sides alike, like the

solen or razor-fish. Some testaceans there are, that are entirely

enveloped in shell and expose no portion of their flesh outside, as

the tethya or ascidians.

    Again, in regard to the shells themselves, the testaceans

present differences when compared with one another. Some are

smooth-shelled, like the solen, the mussel, and some clams, viz. those

that are nicknamed 'milkshells', while others are rough-shelled,

such as the pool-oyster or edible oyster, the pinna, and certain

species of cockles, and the trumpet shells; and of these some are

ribbed, such as the scallop and a certain kind of clam or cockle,

and some are devoid of ribs, as the pinna and another species of clam.

Testaceans also differ from one another in regard to the thickness

or thinness of their shell, both as regards the shell in its

entirety and as regards specific parts of the shell, for instance, the

lips; for some have thin-lipped shells, like the mussel, and others

have thick-lipped shells, like the oyster. A property common to the

above mentioned, and, in fact, to all testaceans, is the smoothness of

their shells inside. Some also are capable of motion, like the

scallop, and indeed some aver that scallops can actually fly, owing to

the circumstance that they often jump right out of the apparatus by

means of which they are caught; others are incapable of motion and are

attached fast to some external object, as is the case with the

pinna. All the spiral-shaped testaceans can move and creep, and even

the limpet relaxes its hold to go in quest of food. In the case of the

univalves and the bivalves, the fleshy substance adheres to the

shell so tenaciously that it can only be removed by an effort; in

the case of the stromboids, it is more loosely attached. And a

peculiarity of all the stromboids is the spiral twist of the shell

in the part farthest away from the head; they are also furnished

from birth with an operculum. And, further, all stromboid testaceans

have their shells on the right hand side, and move not in the

direction of the spire, but the opposite way. Such are the diversities

observed in the external parts of these animals.

    The internal structure is almost the same in all these

creatures, and in the stromboids especially; for it is in size that

these latter differ from one another, and in accidents of the nature

of excess or defect. And there is not much difference between most

of the univalves and bivalves; but, while those that open and shut

differ from one another but slightly, they differ considerably from

such as are incapable of motion. And this will be illustrated more

satisfactorily hereafter.

    The spiral-shaped testaceans are all similarly constructed, but

differ from one another, as has been said, in the way of excess or

defect (for the larger species have larger and more conspicuous

organs, and the smaller have smaller and less conspicuous), and,

furthermore, in relative hardness or softness, and in other such

accidents or properties. All the stromboids, for instance, have the

flesh that extrudes from the mouth of the shell, hard and stiff;

some more, and some less. From the middle of this protrudes the head

and two horns, and these horns are large in the large species, but

exceedingly minute in the smaller ones. The head protrudes from them

all in the same way; and, if the animal be alarmed, the head draws

in again. Some of these creatures have a mouth and teeth, as the

snail; teeth sharp, and small, and delicate. They have also a

proboscis just like that of the fly; and the proboscis is

tongue-shaped. The ceryx and the purple murex have this organ firm and

solid; and just as the myops, or horse-fly, and the oestrus, or

gadfly, can pierce the skin of a quadruped, so is that proboscis

proportionately stronger in these testaceans; for they bore right

through the shells of other shell-fish on which they prey. The stomach

follows close upon the mouth, and, by the way, this organ in the snail

resembles a bird's crop. Underneath come two white firm formations,

mastoid or papillary in form; and similar formations are found in

the cuttle-fish also, only that they are of a firmer consistency in

the cuttle-fish. After the stomach comes an oesophagus, simple and

long, extending to the poppy or quasi-liver, which is in the innermost

recess of the shell. All these statements may be verified in the

case of the purple murex and the ceryx by observation within the whorl

of the shell. What comes next to the oesophagus is the gut; in fact,

the gut is continuous with the oesophagus, and runs its whole length

uncomplicated to the outlet of the residuum. The gut has its point

of origin in the region of the coil of the mecon, or so-called

'poppy', and is wider hereabouts (for remember, the mecon is for the

most part a sort of excretion in all testaceans); it then takes a bend

and runs up again towards the fleshy part, and terminates by the

side of the head, where the animal discharges its residuum; and this

holds good in the case of all stromboid testaceans, whether

terrestrial or marine. From the stomach there is drawn in a parallel

direction with the oesophagus, in the larger snails, a long white duct

enveloped in a membrane, resembling in colour the mastoid formations

higher up; and in it are nicks or interruptions, as in the egg-mass of

the crawfish, only, by the way, the duct of which we are treating is

white and the egg-mass of the crawfish is red. This formation has no

outlet nor duct, but is enveloped in a thin membrane with a narrow

cavity in its interior. And from the gut downward extend black and

rough formations, in close connexion, something like the formations in

the tortoise, only not so black. Marine snails, also, have these

formations, and the white ones, only that the formations are smaller

in the smaller species.

    The non-spiral univalves and bivalves are in some respect

similar in construction, and in some respects dissimilar, to the

spiral testaceans. They all have a head and horns, and a mouth, and

the organ resembling a tongue; but these organs, in the smaller

species, are indiscernible owing to the minuteness of these animals,

and some are indiscernible even in the larger species when dead, or

when at rest and motionless. They all have the mecon, or poppy, but

not all in the same place, nor of equal size, nor similarly open to

observation; thus, the limpets have this organ deep down in the bottom

of the shell, and the bivalves at the hinge connecting the two valves.

They also have in all cases the hairy growths or beards, in a circular

form, as in the scallops. And, with regard to the so-called 'egg',

in those that have it, when they have it, it is situated in one of the

semi-circles of the periphery, as is the case with the white formation

in the snail; for this white formation in the snail corresponds to the

so-called egg of which we are speaking. But all these organs, as has

been stated, are distinctly traceable in the larger species, while

in the small ones they are in some cases almost, and in others

altogether, indiscernible. Hence they are most plainly visible in

the large scallops; and these are the bivalves that have one valve

flat-shaped, like the lid of a pot. The outlet of the excretion is

in all these animals (save for the exception to be afterwards related)

on one side; for there is a passage whereby the excretion passes

out. (And, remember, the mecon or poppy, as has been stated, is an

excretion in all these animals-an excretion enveloped in a

membrane.) The so-called egg has no outlet in any of these

creatures, but is merely an excrescence in the fleshy mass; and it

is not situated in the same region with the gut, but the 'egg' is

situated on the right-hand side and the gut on the left. Such are

the relations of the anal vent in most of these animals; but in the

case of the wild limpet (called by some the 'sea-ear'), the residuum

issues beneath the shell, for the shell is perforated to give an

outlet. In this particular limpet the stomach is seen coming after the

mouth, and the egg-shaped formations are discernible. But for the

relative positions of these parts you are referred to my Treatise on

Anatomy.

    The so-called carcinium or hermit crab is in a way intermediate

between the crustaceans and the testaceans. In its nature it resembles

the crawfish kind, and it is born simple of itself, but by its habit

of introducing itself into a shell and living there it resembles the

testaceans, and so appears to partake of the characters of both kinds.

In shape, to give a simple illustration, it resembles a spider, only

that the part below the head and thorax is larger in this creature

than in the spider. It has two thin red horns, and underneath these

horns two long eyes, not retreating inwards, nor turning sideways like

the eyes of the crab, but protruding straight out; and underneath

these eyes the mouth, and round about the mouth several hair-like

growths, and next after these two bifurcate legs or claws, whereby

it draws in objects towards itself, and two other legs on either side,

and a third small one. All below the thorax is soft, and when opened

in dissection is found to be sallow-coloured within. From the mouth

there runs a single passage right on to the stomach, but the passage

for the excretions is not discernible. The legs and the thorax are

hard, but not so hard as the legs and the thorax of the crab. It

does not adhere to its shell like the purple murex and the ceryx,

but can easily slip out of it. It is longer when found in the shell of

the stromboids than when found in the shell of the neritae.

    And, by the way, the animal found in the shell of the neritae is a

separate species, like to the other in most respects; but of its

bifurcate feet or claws, the right-hand one is small and the left-hand

one is large, and it progresses chiefly by the aid of this latter

and larger one. (In the shells of these animals, and in certain

others, there is found a parasite whose mode of attachment is similar.

The particular one which we have just described is named the

cyllarus.)

    The nerites has a smooth large round shell, and resembles the

ceryx in shape, only the poppy-juice is, in its case, not black but

red. It clings with great force near the middle. In calm weather,

then, they go free afield, but when the wind blows the carcinia take

shelter against the rocks: the neritae themselves cling fast like

limpets; and the same is the case with the haemorrhoid or aporrhaid

and all others of the like kind. And, by the way, they cling to the

rock, when they turn back their operculum, for this operculum seems

like a lid; in fact this structure represents the one part, in the

stromboids, of that which in the bivalves is a duplicate shell. The

interior of the animal is fleshy, and the mouth is inside. And it is

the same with the haemorrhoid, the purple murex, and all suchlike

animals.

    Such of the little crabs as have the left foot or claw the

bigger of the two are found in the neritae, but not in the stromboids.

are some snail-shells which have inside them creatures resembling

those little crayfish that are also found in fresh water. These

creatures, however, differ in having the part inside the shells But as

to the characters, you are referred to my Treatise on Anatomy.

                                   5



    The urchins are devoid of flesh, and this is a character

peculiar to them; and while they are in all cases empty and devoid

of any flesh within, they are in all cases furnished with the black

formations. There are several species of the urchin, and one of

these is that which is made use of for food; this is the kind in which

are found the so-called eggs, large and edible, in the larger and

smaller specimens alike; for even when as yet very small they are

provided with them. There are two other species, the spatangus, and

the so-called bryssus, these animals are pelagic and scarce.

Further, there are the echinometrae, or 'mother-urchins', the

largest in size of all the species. In addition to these there is

another species, small in size, but furnished with large hard

spines; it lives in the sea at a depth of several fathoms; and is used

by some people as a specific for cases of strangury. In the

neighbourhood of Torone there are sea-urchins of a white colour,

shells, spines, eggs and all, and that are longer than the ordinary

sea-urchin. The spine in this species is not large nor strong, but

rather limp; and the black formations in connexion with the mouth

are more than usually numerous, and communicate with the external

duct, but not with one another; in point of fact, the animal is in a

manner divided up by them. The edible urchin moves with greatest

freedom and most often; and this is indicated by the fact that these

urchins have always something or other on their spines.

    All urchins are supplied with eggs, but in some of the species the

eggs are exceedingly small and unfit for food. Singularly enough,

the urchin has what we may call its head and mouth down below, and a

place for the issue of the residuum up above; (and this same

property is common to all stromboids and to limpets). For the food

on which the creature lives lies down below; consequently the mouth

has a position well adapted for getting at the food, and the excretion

is above, near to the back of the shell. The urchin has, also, five

hollow teeth inside, and in the middle of these teeth a fleshy

substance serving the office of a tongue. Next to this comes the

oesophagus, and then the stomach, divided into five parts, and

filled with excretion, all the five parts uniting at the anal vent,

where the shell is perforated for an outlet. Underneath the stomach,

in another membrane, are the so-called eggs, identical in number in

all cases, and that number is always an odd number, to wit five. Up

above, the black formations are attached to the starting-point of

the teeth, and they are bitter to the taste, and unfit for food. A

similar or at least an analogous formation is found in many animals;

as, for instance, in the tortoise, the toad, the frog, the stromboids,

and, generally, in the molluscs; but the formation varies here and

there in colour, and in all cases is altogether uneatable, or more

or less unpalatable. In reality the mouth-apparatus of the urchin is

continuous from one end to the other, but to outward appearance it

is not so, but looks like a horn lantern with the panes of horn left

out. The urchin uses its spines as feet; for it rests its weight on

these, and then moving shifts from place to place.

                                   6



    The so-called tethyum or ascidian has of all these animals the

most remarkable characteristics. It is the only mollusc that has its

entire body concealed within its shell, and the shell is a substance

intermediate between hide and shell, so that it cuts like a piece of

hard leather. It is attached to rocks by its shell, and is provided

with two passages placed at a distance from one another, very minute

and hard to see, whereby it admits and discharges the sea-water; for

it has no visible excretion (whereas of shell fish in general some

resemble the urchin in this matter of excretion, and others are

provided with the so-called mecon, or poppy-juice). If the animal be

opened, it is found to have, in the first place, a tendinous

membrane running round inside the shell-like substance, and within

this membrane is the flesh-like substance of the ascidian, not

resembling that in other molluscs; but this flesh, to which I now

allude, is the same in all ascidia. And this substance is attached

in two places to the membrane and the skin, obliquely; and at the

point of attachment the space is narrowed from side to side, where the

fleshy substance stretches towards the passages that lead outwards

through the shell; and here it discharges and admits food and liquid

matter, just as it would if one of the passages were a mouth and the

other an anal vent; and one of the passages is somewhat wider than the

other Inside it has a pair of cavities, one on either side, a small

partition separating them; and one of these two cavities contains

the liquid. The creature has no other organ whether motor or

sensory, nor, as was said in the case of the others, is it furnished

with any organ connected with excretion, as other shell-fish are.

The colour of the ascidian is in some cases sallow, and in other cases

red.

    There is, furthermore, the genus of the sea-nettles, peculiar in

its way. The sea-nettle, or sea-anemone, clings to rocks like

certain of the testaceans, but at times relaxes its hold. It has no

shell, but its entire body is fleshy. It is sensitive to touch, and,

if you put your hand to it, it will seize and cling to it, as the

cuttlefish would do with its feelers, and in such a way as to make the

flesh of your hand swell up. Its mouth is in the centre of its body,

and it lives adhering to the rock as an oyster to its shell. If any

little fish come up against it it it clings to it; in fact, just as

I described it above as doing to your hand, so it does to anything

edible that comes in its way; and it feeds upon sea-urchins and

scallops. Another species of the sea-nettle roams freely abroad. The

sea-nettle appears to be devoid altogether of excretion, and in this

respect it resembles a plant.

    Of sea-nettles there are two species, the lesser and more

edible, and the large hard ones, such as are found in the

neighbourhood of Chalcis. In winter time their flesh is firm, and

accordingly they are sought after as articles of food, but in summer

weather they are worthless, for they become thin and watery, and if

you catch at them they break at once into bits, and cannot be taken

off the rocks entire; and being oppressed by the heat they tend to

slip back into the crevices of the rocks.

    So much for the external and the internal organs of molluscs,

crustaceans, and testaceans.

                                   7



    We now proceed to treat of insects in like manner. This genus

comprises many species, and, though several kinds are clearly

related to one another, these are not classified under one common

designation, as in the case of the bee, the drone, the wasp, and all

such insects, and again as in the case of those that have their

wings in a sheath or shard, like the cockchafer, the carabus or

stag-beetle, the cantharis or blister-beetle, and the like.

    Insects have three parts common to them all; the head, the trunk

containing the stomach, and a third part in betwixt these two,

corresponding to what in other creatures embraces chest and back. In

the majority of insects this intermediate part is single; but in the

long and multipedal insects it has practically the same number of

segments as of nicks.

    All insects when cut in two continue to live, excepting such as

are naturally cold by nature, or such as from their minute size

chill rapidly; though, by the way, wasps notwithstanding their small

size continue living after severance. In conjunction with the middle

portion either the head or the stomach can live, but the head cannot

live by itself. Insects that are long in shape and many-footed can

live for a long while after being cut in twain, and the severed

portions can move in either direction, backwards or forwards; thus,

the hinder portion, if cut off, can crawl either in the direction of

the section or in the direction of the tail, as is observed in the

scolopendra.

    All insects have eyes, but no other organ of sense discernible,

except that some insects have a kind of a tongue corresponding to a

similar organ common to all testaceans; and by this organ such insects

taste and imbibe their food. In some insects this organ is soft; in

other insects it is firm; as it is, by the way, in the purple-fish,

among testaceans. In the horsefly and the gadfly this organ is hard,

and indeed it is hard in most insects. In point of fact, such

insects as have no sting in the rear use this organ as a weapon, (and,

by the way, such insects as are provided with this organ are

unprovided with teeth, with the exception of a few insects); the fly

by a touch can draw blood with this organ, and the gnat can prick or

sting with it.

    Certain insects are furnished with prickers or stings. Some

insects have the sting inside, as the bee and the wasp, others

outside, as the scorpion; and, by the way, this is the only insect

furnished with a long tail. And, further, the scorpion is furnished

with claws, as is also the creature resembling a scorpion found within

the pages of books.

    In addition to their other organs, flying insects are furnished

with wings. Some insects are dipterous or double-winged, as the fly;

others are tetrapterous or furnished with four wings, as the bee; and,

by the way, no insect with only two wings has a sting in the rear.

Again, some winged insects have a sheath or shard for their wings,

as the cockchafer; whereas in others the wings are unsheathed, as in

the bee. But in the case of all alike, flight is in no way modified by

tail-steerage, and the wing is devoid of quill-structure or division

of any kind.

    Again, some insects have antennae in front of their eyes, as the

butterfly and the horned beetle. Such of them as have the power of

jumping have the hinder legs the longer; and these long hind-legs

whereby they jump bend backwards like the hind-legs of quadrupeds. All

insects have the belly different from the back; as, in fact, is the

case with all animals. The flesh of an insect's body is neither

shell-like nor is it like the internal substance of shell-covered

animals, nor is it like flesh in the ordinary sense of the term; but

it is a something intermediate in quality. Wherefore they have nor

spine, nor bone, nor sepia-bone, nor enveloping shell; but their

body by its hardness is its own protection and requires no

extraneous support. However, insects have a skin; but the skin is

exceedingly thin. These and such-like are the external organs of

insects.

    Internally, next after the mouth, comes a gut, in the majority

of cases straight and simple down to the outlet of the residuum: but

in a few cases the gut is coiled. No insect is provided with any

viscera, or is supplied with fat; and these statements apply to all

animals devoid of blood. Some have a stomach also, and attached to

this the rest of the gut, either simple or convoluted as in the case

of the acris or grasshopper.

    The tettix or cicada, alone of such creatures (and, in fact, alone

of all creatures), is unprovided with a mouth, but it is provided with

the tongue-like formation found in insects furnished with frontward

stings; and this formation in the cicada is long, continuous, and

devoid of any split; and by the aid of this the creature feeds on dew,

and on dew only, and in its stomach no excretion is ever found. Of the

cicada there are several kinds, and they differ from one another in

relative magnitude, and in this respect that the achetes or chirper is

provided with a cleft or aperture under the hypozoma and has in it a

membrane quite discernible, whilst the membrane is indiscernible in

the tettigonia.

    Furthermore, there are some strange creatures to be found in the

sea, which from their rarity we are unable to classify. Experienced

fishermen affirm, some that they have at times seen in the sea animals

like sticks, black, rounded, and of the same thickness throughout;

others that they have seen creatures resembling shields, red in

colour, and furnished with fins packed close together; and others that

they have seen creatures resembling the male organ in shape and

size, with a pair of fins in the place of the testicles, and they aver

that on one occasion a creature of this description was brought up

on the end of a nightline.

    So much then for the parts, external and internal, exceptional and

common, of all animals.

                                   8



    We now proceed to treat of the senses; for there are diversities

in animals with regard to the senses, seeing that some animals have

the use of all the senses, and others the use of a limited number of

them. The total number of the senses (for we have no experience of any

special sense not here included), is five: sight, hearing, smell,

taste, and touch.

    Man, then, and all vivipara that have feet, and, further, all

red-blooded ovipara, appear to have the use of all the five senses,

except where some isolated species has been subjected to mutilation,

as in the case of the mole. For this animal is deprived of sight; it

has no eyes visible, but if the skin-a thick one, by the way-be

stripped off the head, about the place in the exterior where eyes

usually are, the eyes are found inside in a stunted condition,

furnished with all the parts found in ordinary eyes; that is to say,

we find there the black rim, and the fatty part surrounding it; but

all these parts are smaller than the same parts in ordinary visible

eyes. There is no external sign of the existence of these organs in

the mole, owing to the thickness of the skin drawn over them, so

that it would seem that the natural course of development were

congenitally arrested; (for extending from the brain at its junction

with the marrow are two strong sinewy ducts running past the sockets

of the eyes, and terminating at the upper eye-teeth). All the other

animals of the kinds above mentioned have a perception of colour and

of sound, and the senses of smell and taste; the fifth sense, that,

namely, of touch, is common to all animals whatsoever.

    In some animals the organs of sense are plainly discernible; and

this is especially the case with the eyes. For animals have a

special locality for the eyes, and also a special locality for

hearing: that is to say, some animals have ears, while others have the

passage for sound discernible. It is the same with the sense of smell;

that is to say, some animals have nostrils, and others have only the

passages for smell, such as birds. It is the same also with the

organ of taste, the tongue. Of aquatic red-blooded animals, fishes

possess the organ of taste, namely the tongue, but it is in an

imperfect and amorphous form, in other words it is osseous and

undetached. In some fish the palate is fleshy, as in the fresh-water

carp, so that by an inattentive observer it might be mistaken for a

tongue.

    There is no doubt but that fishes have the sense of taste, for a

great number of them delight in special flavours; and fishes freely

take the hook if it be baited with a piece of flesh from a tunny or

from any fat fish, obviously enjoying the taste and the eating of food

of this kind. Fishes have no visible organs for hearing or for

smell; for what might appear to indicate an organ for smell in the

region of the nostril has no communication with the brain. These

indications, in fact, in some cases lead nowhere, like blind alleys,

and in other cases lead only to the gills; but for all this fishes

undoubtedly hear and smell. For they are observed to run away from any

loud noise, such as would be made by the rowing of a galley, so as

to become easy of capture in their holes; for, by the way, though a

sound be very slight in the open air, it has a loud and alarming

resonance to creatures that hear under water. And this is shown in the

capture of the dolphin; for when the hunters have enclosed a shoal

of these fishes with a ring of their canoes, they set up from inside

the canoes a loud splashing in the water, and by so doing induce the

creatures to run in a shoal high and dry up on the beach, and so

capture them while stupefied with the noise. And yet, for all this,

the dolphin has no organ of hearing discernible. Furthermore, when

engaged in their craft, fishermen are particularly careful to make

no noise with oar or net; and after they have spied a shoal, they

let down their nets at a spot so far off that they count upon no noise

being likely to reach the shoal, occasioned either by oar or by the

surging of their boats through the water; and the crews are strictly

enjoined to preserve silence until the shoal has been surrounded. And,

at times, when they want the fish to crowd together, they adopt the

stratagem of the dolphin-hunter; in other words they clatter stones

together, that the fish may, in their fright, gather close into one

spot, and so they envelop them within their nets. (Before

surrounding them, then, they preserve silence, as was said; but, after

hemming the shoal in, they call on every man to shout out aloud and

make any kind of noise; for on hearing the noise and hubbub the fish

are sure to tumble into the nets from sheer fright.) Further, when

fishermen see a shoal of fish feeding at a distance, disporting

themselves in calm bright weather on the surface of the water, if they

are anxious to descry the size of the fish and to learn what kind of a

fish it is, they may succeed in coming upon the shoal whilst yet

basking at the surface if they sail up without the slightest noise,

but if any man make a noise previously, the shoal will be seen to

scurry away in alarm. Again, there is a small river-fish called the

cottus or bullhead; this creature burrows under a rock, and fishers

catch it by clattering stones against the rock, and the fish,

bewildered at the noise, darts out of its hiding-place. From these

facts it is quite obvious that fishes can hear; and indeed some

people, from living near the sea and frequently witnessing such

phenomena, affirm that of all living creatures the fish is the

quickest of hearing. And, by the way, of all fishes the quickest of

hearing are the cestreus or mullet, the chremps, the labrax or

basse, the salpe or saupe, the chromis or sciaena, and such like.

Other fishes are less quick of hearing, and, as might be expected, are

more apt to be found living at the bottom of the sea.

    The case is similar in regard to the sense of smell. Thus, as a

rule, fishes will not touch a bait that is not fresh, neither are they

all caught by one and the same bait, but they are severally caught

by baits suited to their several likings, and these baits they

distinguish by their sense of smell; and, by the way, some fishes

are attracted by malodorous baits, as the saupe, for instance, is

attracted by excrement. Again, a number of fishes live in caves; and

accordingly fishermen, when they want to entice them out, smear the

mouth of a cave with strong-smelling pickles, and the fish are Soon

attracted to the smell. And the eel is caught in a similar way; for

the fisherman lays down an earthen pot that has held pickles, after

inserting a 'weel' in the neck thereof. As a general rule, fishes

are especially attracted by savoury smells. For this reason, fishermen

roast the fleshy parts of the cuttle-fish and use it as bait on

account of its smell, for fish are peculiarly attracted by it; they

also bake the octopus and bait their fish-baskets or weels with it,

entirely, as they say, on account of its smell. Furthermore,

gregarious fishes, if fish washings or bilge-water be thrown

overboard, are observed to scud off to a distance, from apparent

dislike of the smell. And it is asserted that they can at once

detect by smell the presence of their own blood; and this faculty is

manifested by their hurrying off to a great distance whenever

fish-blood is spilt in the sea. And, as a general rule, if you bait

your weel with a stinking bait, the fish refuse to enter the weel or

even to draw near; but if you bait the weel with a fresh and savoury

bait, they come at once from long distances and swim into it. And

all this is particularly manifest in the dolphin; for, as was

stated, it has no visible organ of hearing, and yet it is captured

when stupefied with noise; and so, while it has no visible organ for

smell, it has the sense of smell remarkably keen. It is manifest,

then, that the animals above mentioned are in possession of all the

five senses.

    All other animals may, with very few exceptions, be comprehended

within four genera: to wit, molluscs, crustaceans, testaceans, and

insects. Of these four genera, the mollusc, the crustacean, and the

insect have all the senses: at all events, they have sight, smell, and

taste. As for insects, both winged and wingless, they can detect the

presence of scented objects afar off, as for instance bees and

snipes detect the presence of honey at a distance; and do so

recognizing it by smell. Many insects are killed by the smell of

brimstone; ants, if the apertures to their dwellings be smeared with

powdered origanum and brimstone, quit their nests; and most insects

may be banished with burnt hart's horn, or better still by the burning

of the gum styrax. The cuttle-fish, the octopus, and the crawfish

may be caught by bait. The octopus, in fact, clings so tightly to

the rocks that it cannot be pulled off, but remains attached even when

the knife is employed to sever it; and yet, if you apply fleabane to

the creature, it drops off at the very smell of it. The facts are

similar in regard to taste. For the food that insects go in quest of

is of diverse kinds, and they do not all delight in the same flavours:

for instance, the bee never settles on a withered or wilted flower,

but on fresh and sweet ones; and the conops or gnat settles only on

acrid substances and not on sweet. The sense of touch, by the way,

as has been remarked, is common to all animals. Testaceans have the

senses of smell and taste. With regard to their possession of the

sense of smell, that is proved by the use of baits, e.g. in the case

of the purple-fish; for this creature is enticed by baits of rancid

meat, which it perceives and is attracted to from a great distance.

The proof that it possesses a sense of taste hangs by the proof of its

sense of smell; for whenever an animal is attracted to a thing by

perceiving its smell, it is sure to like the taste of it. Further, all

animals furnished with a mouth derive pleasure or pain from the

touch of sapid juices.

    With regard to sight and hearing, we cannot make statements with

thorough confidence or on irrefutable evidence. However, the solen

or razor-fish, if you make a noise, appears to burrow in the sand, and

to hide himself deeper when he hears the approach of the iron rod (for

the animal, be it observed, juts a little out of its hole, while the

greater part of the body remains within),-and scallops, if you present

your finger near their open valves, close them tight again as though

they could see what you were doing. Furthermore, when fishermen are

laying bait for neritae, they always get to leeward of them, and never

speak a word while so engaged, under the firm impression that the

animal can smell and hear; and they assure us that, if any one

speaks aloud, the creature makes efforts to escape. With regard to

testaceans, of the walking or creeping species the urchin appears to

have the least developed sense of smell; and, of the stationary

species, the ascidian and the barnacle.

    So much for the organs of sense in the general run of animals.

We now proceed to treat of voice.

                                   9



    Voice and sound are different from one another; and language

differs from voice and sound. The fact is that no animal can give

utterance to voice except by the action of the pharynx, and

consequently such animals as are devoid of lung have no voice; and

language is the articulation of vocal sounds by the instrumentality of

the tongue. Thus, the voice and larynx can emit vocal or vowel sounds;

non-vocal or consonantal sounds are made by the tongue and the lips;

and out of these vocal and non-vocal sounds language is composed.

Consequently, animals that have no tongue at all or that have a tongue

not freely detached, have neither voice nor language; although, by the

way, they may be enabled to make noises or sounds by other organs than

the tongue.

    Insects, for instance, have no voice and no language, but they can

emit sound by internal air or wind, though not by the emission of

air or wind; for no insects are capable of respiration. But some of

them make a humming noise, like the bee and the other winged

insects; and others are said to sing, as the cicada. And all these

latter insects make their special noises by means of the membrane that

is underneath the 'hypozoma'-those insects, that is to say, whose body

is thus divided; as for instance, one species of cicada, which makes

the sound by means of the friction of the air. Flies and bees, and the

like, produce their special noise by opening and shutting their

wings in the act of flying; for the noise made is by the friction of

air between the wings when in motion. The noise made by grasshoppers

is produced by rubbing or reverberating with their long hind-legs.

    No mollusc or crustacean can produce any natural voice or sound.

Fishes can produce no voice, for they have no lungs, nor windpipe

and pharynx; but they emit certain inarticulate sounds and squeaks,

which is what is called their 'voice', as the lyra or gurnard, and the

sciaena (for these fishes make a grunting kind of noise) and the

caprus or boar-fish in the river Achelous, and the chalcis and the

cuckoo-fish; for the chalcis makes a sort piping sound, and the

cuckoo-fish makes a sound greatly like the cry of the cuckoo, and is

nicknamed from the circumstance. The apparent voice in all these

fishes is a sound caused in some cases by a rubbing motion of their

gills, which by the way are prickly, or in other cases by internal

parts about their bellies; for they all have air or wind inside

them, by rubbing and moving which they produce the sounds. Some

cartilaginous fish seem to squeak.

    But in these cases the term 'voice' is inappropriate; the more

correct expression would be 'sound'. For the scallop, when it goes

along supporting itself on the water, which is technically called

'flying', makes a whizzing sound; and so does the sea-swallow or

flying-fish: for this fish flies in the air, clean out of the water,

being furnished with fins broad and long. Just then as in the flight

of birds the sound made by their wings is obviously not voice, so is

it in the case of all these other creatures.

    The dolphin, when taken out of the water, gives a squeak and moans

in the air, but these noises do not resemble those above mentioned.

For this creature has a voice (and can therefore utter vocal or

vowel sounds), for it is furnished with a lung and a windpipe; but its

tongue is not loose, nor has it lips, so as to give utterance to an

articulate sound (or a sound of vowel and consonant in combination.)

    Of animals which are furnished with tongue and lung, the oviparous

quadrupeds produce a voice, but a feeble one; in some cases, a

shrill piping sound, like the serpent; in others, a thin faint cry; in

others, a low hiss, like the tortoise. The formation of the tongue

in the frog is exceptional. The front part of the tongue, which in

other animals is detached, is tightly fixed in the frog as it is in

all fishes; but the part towards the pharynx is freely detached, and

may, so to speak, be spat outwards, and it is with this that it

makes its peculiar croak. The croaking that goes on in the marsh is

the call of the males to the females at rutting time; and, by the way,

all animals have a special cry for the like end at the like season, as

is observed in the case of goats, swine, and sheep. (The bull-frog

makes its croaking noise by putting its under jaw on a level with

the surface of the water and extending its upper jaw to its utmost

capacity. The tension is so great that the upper jaw becomes

transparent, and the animal's eyes shine through the jaw like lamps;

for, by the way, the commerce of the sexes takes place usually in

the night time.) Birds can utter vocal sounds; and such of them can

articulate best as have the tongue moderately flat, and also such as

have thin delicate tongues. In some cases, the male and the female

utter the same note; in other cases, different notes. The smaller

birds are more vocal and given to chirping than the larger ones; but

in the pairing season every species of bird becomes particularly

vocal. Some of them call when fighting, as the quail, others cry or

crow when challenging to combat, as the partridge, or when victorious,

as the barn-door cock. In some cases cock-birds and hens sing alike,

as is observed in the nightingale, only that the hen stops singing

when brooding or rearing her young; in other birds, the cocks sing

more than the hens; in fact, with barn-door fowls and quails, the cock

sings and the hen does not.

    Viviparous quadrupeds utter vocal sounds of different kinds, but

they have no power of converse. In fact, this power, or language, is

peculiar to man. For while the capability of talking implies the

capability of uttering vocal sounds, the converse does not hold

good. Men that are born deaf are in all cases also dumb; that is, they

can make vocal sounds, but they cannot speak. Children, just as they

have no control over other parts, so have no control, at first, over

the tongue; but it is so far imperfect, and only frees and detaches

itself by degrees, so that in the interval children for the most

part lisp and stutter.

    Vocal sounds and modes of language differ according to locality.

Vocal sounds are characterized chiefly by their pitch, whether high or

low, and the kinds of sound capable of being produced are identical

within the limits of one and the same species; but articulate sound,

that one might reasonably designate 'language', differs both in

various animals, and also in the same species according to diversity

of locality; as for instance, some partridges cackle, and some make

a shrill twittering noise. Of little birds, some sing a different note

from the parent birds, if they have been removed from the nest and

have heard other birds singing; and a mother-nightingale has been

observed to give lessons in singing to a young bird, from which

spectacle we might obviously infer that the song of the bird was not

equally congenital with mere voice, but was something capable of

modification and of improvement. Men have the same voice or vocal

sounds, but they differ from one another in speech or language.

    The elephant makes a vocal sound of a windlike sort by the mouth

alone, unaided by the trunk, just like the sound of a man panting or

sighing; but, if it employ the trunk as well, the sound produced is

like that of a hoarse trumpet.

                                  10



    With regard to the sleeping and waking of animals, all creatures

that are red-blooded and provided with legs give sensible proof that

they go to sleep and that they waken up from sleep; for, as a matter

of fact, all animals that are furnished with eyelids shut them up when

they go to sleep. Furthermore, it would appear that not only do men

dream, but horses also, and dogs, and oxen; aye, and sheep, and goats,

and all viviparous quadrupeds; and dogs show their dreaming by barking

in their sleep. With regard to oviparous animals we cannot be sure

that they dream, but most undoubtedly they sleep. And the same may

be said of water animals, such as fishes, molluscs, crustaceans, to

wit crawfish and the like. These animals sleep without doubt, although

their sleep is of very short duration. The proof of their sleeping

cannot be got from the condition of their eyes-for none of these

creatures are furnished with eyelids-but can be obtained only from

their motionless repose.

    Apart from the irritation caused by lice and what are nicknamed

fleas, fish are met with in a state so motionless that one might

easily catch them by hand; and, as a matter of fact, these little

creatures, if the fish remain long in one position, will attack them

in myriads and devour them. For these parasites are found in the

depths of the sea, and are so numerous that they devour any bait

made of fish's flesh if it be left long on the ground at the bottom;

and fishermen often draw up a cluster of them, all clinging on to

the bait.

    But it is from the following facts that we may more reasonably

infer that fishes sleep. Very often it is possible to take a fish

off its guard so far as to catch hold of it or to give it a blow

unawares; and all the while that you are preparing to catch or

strike it, the fish is quite still but for a slight motion of the

tail. And it is quite obvious that the animal is sleeping, from its

movements if any disturbance be made during its repose; for it moves

just as you would expect in a creature suddenly awakened. Further,

owing to their being asleep, fish may be captured by torchlight. The

watchmen in the tunny-fishery often take advantage of the fish being

asleep to envelop them in a circle of nets; and it is quite obvious

that they were thus sleeping by their lying still and allowing the

glistening under-parts of their bodies to become visible, while the

capture is taking Place. They sleep in the night-time more than during

the day; and so soundly at night that you may cast the net without

making them stir. Fish, as a general rule, sleep close to the

ground, or to the sand or to a stone at the bottom, or after

concealing themselves under a rock or the ground. Flat fish go to

sleep in the sand; and they can be distinguished by the outlines of

their shapes in the sand, and are caught in this position by being

speared with pronged instruments. The basse, the chrysophrys or

gilt-head, the mullet, and fish of the like sort are often caught in

the daytime by the prong owing to their having been surprised when

sleeping; for it is scarcely probable that fish could be pronged while

awake. Cartilaginous fish sleep at times so soundly that they may be

caught by hand. The dolphin and the whale, and all such as are

furnished with a blow-hole, sleep with the blow-hole over the

surface of the water, and breathe through the blow-hole while they

keep up a quiet flapping of their fins; indeed, some mariners assure

us that they have actually heard the dolphin snoring.

    Molluscs sleep like fishes, and crustaceans also. It is plain also

that insects sleep; for there can be no mistaking their condition of

motionless repose. In the bee the fact of its being asleep is very

obvious; for at night-time bees are at rest and cease to hum. But

the fact that insects sleep may be very well seen in the case of

common every-day creatures; for not only do they rest at night-time

from dimness of vision (and, by the way, all hard-eyed creatures see

but indistinctly), but even if a lighted candle be presented they

continue sleeping quite as soundly.

    Of all animals man is most given to dreaming. Children and infants

do not dream, but in most cases dreaming comes on at the age of four

or five years. Instances have been known of full-grown men and women

that have never dreamed at all; in exceptional cases of this kind,

it has been observed that when a dream occurs in advanced life it

prognosticates either actual dissolution or a general break-up of

the system.

    So much then for sensation and for the phenomena of sleeping and

of awakening.

                                  11



    With regard to sex, some animals are divided into male and female,

but others are not so divided but can only be said in a comparative

way to bring forth young and to be pregnant. In animals that live

confined to one spot there is no duality of sex; nor is there such, in

fact, in any testaceans. In molluscs and in crustaceans we find male

and female: and, indeed, in all animals furnished with feet, biped

or quadruped; in short, in all such as by copulation engender either

live young or egg or grub. In the several genera, with however certain

exceptions, there either absolutely is or absolutely is not a

duality of sex. Thus, in quadrupeds the duality is universal, while

the absence of such duality is universal in testaceans, and of these

creatures, as with plants, some individuals are fruitful and some

are not their lying still

    But among insects and fishes, some cases are found wholly devoid

of this duality of sex. For instance, the eel is neither male nor

female, and can engender nothing. In fact, those who assert that

eels are at times found with hair-like or worm-like progeny

attached, make only random assertions from not having carefully

noticed the locality of such attachments. For no eel nor animal of

this kind is ever viviparous unless previously oviparous; and no eel

was ever yet seen with an egg. And animals that are viviparous have

their young in the womb and closely attached, and not in the belly;

for, if the embryo were kept in the belly, it would be subjected to

the process of digestion like ordinary food. When people rest

duality of sex in the eel on the assertion that the head of the male

is bigger and longer, and the head of the female smaller and more

snubbed, they are taking diversity of species for diversity of sex.

    There are certain fish that are nicknamed the epitragiae, or

capon-fish, and, by the way, fish of this description are found in

fresh water, as the carp and the balagrus. This sort of fish never has

either roe or milt; but they are hard and fat all over, and are

furnished with a small gut; and these fish are regarded as of

super-excellent quality.

    Again, just as in testaceans and in plants there is what bears and

engenders, but not what impregnates, so is it, among fishes, with

the psetta, the erythrinus, and the channe; for these fish are in

all cases found furnished with eggs.

    As a general rule, in red-blooded animals furnished with feet

and not oviparous, the male is larger and longer-lived than the female

(except with the mule, where the female is longer-lived and bigger

than the male); whereas in oviparous and vermiparous creatures, as

in fishes and in insects, the female is larger than the male; as,

for instance, with the serpent, the phalangium or venom-spider, the

gecko, and the frog. The same difference in size of the sexes is found

in fishes, as, for instance, in the smaller cartilaginous fishes, in

the greater part of the gregarious species, and in all that live in

and about rocks. The fact that the female is longer-lived than the

male is inferred from the fact that female fishes are caught older

than males. Furthermore, in all animals the upper and front parts

are better, stronger, and more thoroughly equipped in the male than in

the female, whereas in the female those parts are the better that

may be termed hinder-parts or underparts. And this statement is

applicable to man and to all vivipara that have feet. Again, the

female is less muscular and less compactly jointed, and more thin

and delicate in the hair-that is, where hair is found; and, where

there is no hair, less strongly furnished in some analogous substance.

And the female is more flaccid in texture of flesh, and more

knock-kneed, and the shin-bones are thinner; and the feet are more

arched and hollow in such animals as are furnished with feet. And with

regard to voice, the female in all animals that are vocal has a

thinner and sharper voice than the male; except, by the way, with

kine, for the lowing and bellowing of the cow has a deeper note than

that of the bull. With regard to organs of defence and offence, such

as teeth, tusks, horns, spurs, and the like, these in some species the

male possesses and the female does not; as, for instance, the hind has

no horns, and where the cock-bird has a spur the hen is entirely

destitute of the organ; and in like manner the sow is devoid of tusks.

In other species such organs are found in both sexes, but are more

perfectly developed in the male; as, for instance, the horn of the

bull is more powerful than the horn of the cow.

