





                                Book VI

                                   1



    So much for the generative processes in snakes and insects, and

also in oviparous quadrupeds. Birds without exception lay eggs, but

the pairing season and the times of parturition are not alike for all.

Some birds couple and lay at almost any time in the year, as for

instance the barn-door hen and the pigeon: the former of these

coupling and laying during the entire year, with the exception of

the month before and the month after the winter solstice. Some hens,

even in the high breeds, lay a large quantity of eggs before brooding,

amounting to as many as sixty; and, by the way, the higher breeds

are less prolific than the inferior ones. The Adrian hens are

small-sized, but they lay every day; they are cross-tempered, and

often kill their chickens; they are of all colours. Some

domesticated hens lay twice a day; indeed, instances have been known

where hens, after exhibiting extreme fecundity, have died suddenly.

Hens, then, lay eggs, as has been stated, at all times

indiscriminately; the pigeon, the ring-dove, the turtle-dove, and

the stock-dove lay twice a year, and the pigeon actually lays ten

times a year. The great majority of birds lay during the

spring-time. Some birds are prolific, and prolific in either of two

ways-either by laying often, as the pigeon, or by laying many eggs

at a sitting, as the barn-door hen. All birds of prey, or birds with

crooked talons, are unprolific, except the kestrel: this bird is the

most prolific of birds of prey; as many as four eggs have been

observed in the nest, and occasionally it lays even more.

    Birds in general lay their eggs in nests, but such as are

disqualified for flight, as the partridge and the quail, do not lay

them in nests but on the ground, and cover them over with loose

material. The same is the case with the lark and the tetrix. These

birds hatch in sheltered places; but the bird called merops in

Boeotia, alone of all birds, burrows into holes in the ground and

hatches there.

    Thrushes, like swallows, build nests of clay, on high trees, and

build them in rows all close together, so that from their continuity

the structure resembles a necklace of nests. Of all birds that hatch

for themselves the hoopoe is the only one that builds no nest

whatever; it gets into the hollow of the trunk of a tree, and lays its

eggs there without making any sort of nest. The circus builds either

under a dwelling-roof or on cliffs. The tetrix, called ourax in

Athens, builds neither on the ground nor on trees, but on low-lying

shrubs.

                                   2



    The egg in the case of all birds alike is hard-shelled, if it be

the produce of copulation and be laid by a healthy hen-for some hens

lay soft eggs. The interior of the egg is of two colours, and the

white part is outside and the yellow part within.

    The eggs of birds that frequent rivers and marshes differ from

those of birds that live on dry land; that is to say, the eggs of

waterbirds have comparatively more of the yellow or yolk and less of

the white. Eggs vary in colour according to their kind. Some eggs

are white, as those of the pigeon and of the partridge; others are

yellowish, as the eggs of marsh birds; in some cases the eggs are

mottled, as the eggs of the guinea-fowl and the pheasant; while the

eggs of the kestrel are red, like vermilion.

    Eggs are not symmetrically shaped at both ends: in other

words, one end is comparatively sharp, and the other end is

comparatively blunt; and it is the latter end that protrudes first

at the time of laying. Long and pointed eggs are female; those that

are round, or more rounded at the narrow end, are male. Eggs are

hatched by the incubation of the mother-bird. In some cases, as in

Egypt, they are hatched spontaneously in the ground, by being buried

in dung heaps. A story is told of a toper in Syracuse, how he used

to put eggs into the ground under his rush-mat and to keep on drinking

until he hatched them. Instances have occurred of eggs being deposited

in warm vessels and getting hatched spontaneously.

    The sperm of birds, as of animals in general, is white. After

the female has submitted to the male, she draws up the sperm to

underneath her midriff. At first it is little in size and white in

colour; by and by it is red, the colour of blood; as it grows, it

becomes pale and yellow all over. When at length it is getting ripe

for hatching, it is subject to differentiation of substance, and the

yolk gathers together within and the white settles round it on the

outside. When the full time is come, the egg detaches itself and

protrudes, changing from soft to hard with such temporal exactitude

that, whereas it is not hard during the process of protrusion, it

hardens immediately after the process is completed: that is if there

be no concomitant pathological circumstances. Cases have occurred

where substances resembling the egg at a critical point of its

growth-that is, when it is yellow all over, as the yolk is

subsequently-have been found in the cock when cut open, underneath his

midriff, just where the hen has her eggs; and these are entirely

yellow in appearance and of the same size as ordinary eggs. Such

phenomena are regarded as unnatural and portentous.

    Such as affirm that wind-eggs are the residua of eggs previously

begotten from copulation are mistaken in this assertion, for we have

cases well authenticated where chickens of the common hen and goose

have laid wind-eggs without ever having been subjected to

copulation. Wind-eggs are smaller, less palatable, and more liquid

than true eggs, and are produced in greater numbers. When they are put

under the mother bird, the liquid contents never coagulate, but both

the yellow and the white remain as they were. Wind-eggs are laid by

a number of birds: as for instance by the common hen, the hen

partridge, the hen pigeon, the peahen, the goose, and the vulpanser.

Eggs are hatched under brooding hens more rapidly in summer than in

winter; that is to say, hens hatch in eighteen days in summer, but

occasionally in winter take as many as twenty-five. And by the way for

brooding purposes some birds make better mothers than others. If it

thunders while a hen-bird is brooding, the eggs get addled.

Wind-eggs that are called by some cynosura and uria are produced

chiefly in summer. Wind-eggs are called by some zephyr-eggs, because

at spring-time hen-birds are observed to inhale the breezes; they do

the same if they be stroked in a peculiar way by hand. Wind-eggs can

turn into fertile eggs, and eggs due to previous copulation can change

breed, if before the change of the yellow to the white the hen that

contains wind-eggs, or eggs begotten of copulation be trodden by

another cock-bird. Under these circumstances the wind-eggs turn into

fertile eggs, and the previously impregnated eggs follow the breed

of the impregnator; but if the latter impregnation takes place

during the change of the yellow to the white, then no change in the

egg takes place: the wind-egg does not become a true egg, and the true

egg does not take on the breed of the latter impregnator. If when

the egg-substance is small copulation be intermitted, the previously

existing egg-substance exhibits no increase; but if the hen be again

submitted to the male the increase in size proceeds with rapidity.

    The yolk and the white are diverse not only in colour but also

in properties. Thus, the yolk congeals under the influence of cold,

whereas the white instead of congealing is inclined rather to liquefy.

Again, the white stiffens under the influence of fire, whereas the

yolk does not stiffen; but, unless it be burnt through and through, it

remains soft, and in point of fact is inclined to set or to harden

more from the boiling than from the roasting of the egg. The yolk

and the white are separated by a membrane from one another. The

so-called 'hail-stones', or treadles, that are found at the

extremity of the yellow in no way contribute towards generation, as

some erroneously suppose: they are two in number, one below and the

other above. If you take out of the shells a number of yolks and a

number of whites and pour them into a sauce pan and boil them slowly

over a low fire, the yolks will gather into the centre and the

whites will set all around them.

    Young hens are the first to lay, and they do so at the beginning

of spring and lay more eggs than the older hens, but the eggs of the

younger hens are comparatively small. As a general rule, if hens get

no brooding they pine and sicken. After copulation hens shiver and

shake themselves, and often kick rubbish about all round them-and

this, by the way, they do sometimes after laying-whereas pigeons trail

their rumps on the ground, and geese dive under the water.

Conception of the true egg and conformation of the wind-egg take place

rapidly with most birds; as for instance with the hen-partridge when

in heat. The fact is that, when she stands to windward and within

scent of the male, she conceives, and becomes useless for decoy

purposes: for, by the way, the partridge appears to have a very

acute sense of smell.

    The generation of the egg after copulation and the generation of

the chick from the subsequent hatching of the egg are not brought

about within equal periods for all birds, but differ as to time

according to the size of the parent-birds. The egg of the common hen

after copulation sets and matures in ten days a general rule; the

egg of the pigeon in a somewhat lesser period. Pigeons have the

faculty of holding back the egg at the very moment of parturition;

if a hen pigeon be put about by any one, for instance if it be

disturbed on its nest, or have a feather plucked out, or sustain any

other annoyance or disturbance, then even though she had made up her

mind to lay she can keep the egg back in abeyance. A singular

phenomenon is observed in pigeons with regard to pairing: that is,

they kiss one another just when the male is on the point of mounting

the female, and without this preliminary the male would decline to

perform his function. With the older males the preliminary kiss is

only given to begin with, and subsequently sequently he mounts without

previously kissing; with younger males the preliminary is never

omitted. Another singularity in these birds is that the hens tread one

another when a cock is not forthcoming, after kissing one another just

as takes place in the normal pairing. Though they do not impregnate

one another they lay more eggs under these than under ordinary

circumstances; no chicks, however, result therefrom, but all such eggs

are wind-eggs.

                                   3



    Generation from the egg proceeds in an identical manner with all

birds, but the full periods from conception to birth differ, as has

been said. With the common hen after three days and three nights there

is the first indication of the embryo; with larger birds the

interval being longer, with smaller birds shorter. Meanwhile the

yolk comes into being, rising towards the sharp end, where the

primal element of the egg is situated, and where the egg gets hatched;

and the heart appears, like a speck of blood, in the white of the egg.

This point beats and moves as though endowed with life, and from it

two vein-ducts with blood in them trend in a convoluted course (as the

egg substance goes on growing, towards each of the two circumjacent

integuments); and a membrane carrying bloody fibres now envelops the

yolk, leading off from the vein-ducts. A little afterwards the body is

differentiated, at first very small and white. The head is clearly

distinguished, and in it the eyes, swollen out to a great extent. This

condition of the eyes lat on for a good while, as it is only by

degrees that they diminish in size and collapse. At the outset the

under portion of the body appears insignificant in comparison with the

upper portion. Of the two ducts that lead from the heart, the one

proceeds towards the circumjacent integument, and the other, like a

navel-string, towards the yolk. The life-element of the chick is in

the white of the egg, and the nutriment comes through the navel-string

out of the yolk.

    When the egg is now ten days old the chick and all its parts are

distinctly visible. The head is still larger than the rest of its

body, and the eyes larger than the head, but still devoid of vision.

The eyes, if removed about this time, are found to be larger than

beans, and black; if the cuticle be peeled off them there is a white

and cold liquid inside, quite glittering in the sunlight, but there is

no hard substance whatsoever. Such is the condition of the head and

eyes. At this time also the larger internal organs are visible, as

also the stomach and the arrangement of the viscera; and veins that

seem to proceed from the heart are now close to the navel. From the

navel there stretch a pair of veins; one towards the membrane that

envelops the yolk (and, by the way, the yolk is now liquid, or more so

than is normal), and the other towards that membrane which envelops

collectively the membrane wherein the chick lies, the membrane of

the yolk, and the intervening liquid. (For, as the chick grows, little

by little one part of the yolk goes upward, and another part downward,

and the white liquid is between them; and the white of the egg is

underneath the lower part of the yolk, as it was at the outset.) On

the tenth day the white is at the extreme outer surface, reduced in

amount, glutinous, firm in substance, and sallow in colour.

    The disposition of the several constituent parts is as

follows. First and outermost comes the membrane of the egg, not that

of the shell, but underneath it. Inside this membrane is a white

liquid; then comes the chick, and a membrane round about it,

separating it off so as to keep the chick free from the liquid; next

after the chick comes the yolk, into which one of the two veins was

described as leading, the other one leading into the enveloping

white substance. (A membrane with a liquid resembling serum envelops

the entire structure. Then comes another membrane right round the

embryo, as has been described, separating it off against the liquid.

Underneath this comes the yolk, enveloped in another membrane (into

which yolk proceeds the navel-string that leads from the heart and the

big vein), so as to keep the embryo free of both liquids.)

    About the twentieth day, if you open the egg and touch the

chick, it moves inside and chirps; and it is already coming to be

covered with down, when, after the twentieth day is ast, the chick

begins to break the shell. The head is situated over the right leg

close to the flank, and the wing is placed over the head; and about

this time is plain to be seen the membrane resembling an after-birth

that comes next after the outermost membrane of the shell, into

which membrane the one of the navel-strings was described as leading

(and, by the way, the chick in its entirety is now within it), and

so also is the other membrane resembling an after-birth, namely that

surrounding the yolk, into which the second navel-string was described

as leading; and both of them were described as being connected with

the heart and the big vein. At this conjuncture the navel-string

that leads to the outer afterbirth collapses and becomes detached from

the chick, and the membrane that leads into the yolk is fastened on to

the thin gut of the creature, and by this time a considerable amount

of the yolk is inside the chick and a yellow sediment is in its

stomach. About this time it discharges residuum in the direction of

the outer after-birth, and has residuum inside its stomach; and the

outer residuum is white (and there comes a white substance inside). By

and by the yolk, diminishing gradually in size, at length becomes

entirely used up and comprehended within the chick (so that, ten

days after hatching, if you cut open the chick, a small remnant of the

yolk is still left in connexion with the gut), but it is detached from

the navel, and there is nothing in the interval between, but it has

been used up entirely. During the period above referred to the chick

sleeps, wakes up, makes a move and looks up and Chirps; and the

heart and the navel together palpitate as though the creature were

respiring. So much as to generation from the egg in the case of birds.

    Birds lay some eggs that are unfruitful, even eggs that are

the result of copulation, and no life comes from such eggs by

incubation; and this phenomenon is observed especially with pigeons.

    Twin eggs have two yolks. In some twin eggs a thin partition

of white intervenes to prevent the yolks mixing with each other, but

some twin eggs are unprovided with such partition, and the yokes run

into one another. There are some hens that lay nothing but twin

eggs, and in their case the phenomenon regarding the yolks has been

observed. For instance, a hen has been known to lay eighteen eggs, and

to hatch twins out of them all, except those that were wind-eggs;

the rest were fertile (though, by the way, one of the twins is

always bigger than the other), but the eighteenth was abnormal or

monstrous.

                                   4



    Birds of the pigeon kind, such as the ringdove and the

turtle-dove, lay two eggs at a time; that is to say, they do so as a

general rule, and they never lay more than three. The pigeon, as has

been said, lays at all seasons; the ring-dove and the turtle-dove

lay in the springtime, and they never lay more than twice in the

same season. The hen-bird lays the second pair of eggs when the

first pair happens to have been destroyed, for many of the hen-pigeons

destroy the first brood. The hen-pigeon, as has been said,

occasionally lays three eggs, but it never rears more than two chicks,

and sometimes rears only one; and the odd one is always a wind-egg.

    Very few birds propagate within their first year. All birds,

after once they have begun laying, keep on having eggs, though in

the case of some birds it is difficult to detect the fact from the

minute size of the creature.

    The pigeon, as a rule, lays a male and a female egg, and generally

lays the male egg first; after laying it allows a day's interval to

ensue and then lays the second egg. The male takes its turn of sitting

during the daytime; the female sits during the night. The first-laid

egg is hatched and brought to birth within twenty days; and the mother

bird pecks a hole in the egg the day before she hatches it out. The

two parent birds brood for some time over the chicks in the way in

which they brooded previously over the eggs. In all connected with the

rearing of the young the female parent is more cross-tempered than the

male, as is the case with most animals after parturition. The hens lay

as many as ten times in the year; occasional instances have been known

of their laying eleven times, and in Egypt they actually lay twelve

times. The pigeon, male and female, couples within the year; in

fact, it couples when only six months old. Some assert that

ringdoves and turtle-doves pair and procreate when only three months

old, and instance their superabundant numbers by way of proof of the

assertion. The hen-pigeon carries her eggs fourteen days; for as

many more days the parent birds hatch the eggs; by the end of

another fourteen days the chicks are so far capable of flight as to be

overtaken with difficulty. (The ring-dove, according to all

accounts, lives up to forty years. The partridge lives over

sixteen.) (After one brood the pigeon is ready for another within

thirty days.)

                                   5



    The vulture builds its nest on inaccessible cliffs; for which

reason its nest and young are rarely seen. And therefore Herodorus,

father of Bryson the Sophist, declares that vultures belong to some

foreign country unknown to us, stating as a proof of the assertion

that no one has ever seen a vulture's nest, and also that vultures

in great numbers make a sudden appearance in the rear of armies.

However, difficult as it is to get a sight of it, a vulture's nest has

been seen. The vulture lays two eggs.

    (Carnivorous birds in general are observed to lay but once a

year. The swallow is the only carnivorous bird that builds a nest

twice. If you prick out the eyes of swallow chicks while they are

yet young, the birds will get well again and will see by and by.)

                                   6



    The eagle lays three eggs and hatches two of them, as it is said

in the verses ascribed to Musaeus:



          That lays three, hatches two, and cares for one.



    This is the case in most instances, though occasionally a brood of

three has been observed. As the young ones grow, the mother becomes

wearied with feeding them and extrudes one of the pair from the

nest. At the same time the bird is said to abstain from food, to avoid

harrying the young of wild animals. That is to say, its  wings blanch,

and for some days its talons get turned awry. It is in consequence

about this time cross-tempered to its own young. The phene is said

to rear the young one that has been expelled the nest. The eagle

broods for about thirty days.

    The hatching period is about the same for the larger birds, such

as the goose and the great bustard; for the middle-sized birds it

extends over about twenty days, as in the case of the kite and the

hawk. The kite in general lays two eggs, but occasionally rears

three young ones. The so-called aegolius at times rears four. It is

not true that, as some aver, the raven lays only two eggs; it lays a

larger number. It broods for about twenty days and then extrudes its

young. Other birds perform the same operation; at all events mother

birds that lay several eggs often extrude one of their young.

    Birds of the eagle species are not alike in the treatment of their

young. The white-tailed eagle is cross, the black eagle is

affectionate in the feeding of the young; though, by the way, all

birds of prey, when their brood is rather forward in being able to

fly, beat and extrude them from the nest. The majority of birds

other than birds of prey, as has been said, also act in this manner,

and after feeding their young take no further care of them; but the

crow is an exception. This bird for a considerable time takes charge

of her young; for, even when her young can fly, she flies alongside of

them and supplies them with food.

                                   7



    The cuckoo is said by some to be a hawk transformed, because at

the time of the cuckoo's coming, the hawk, which it resembles, is

never seen; and indeed it is only for a few days that you will see

hawks about when the cuckoo's note sounds early in the season. The

cuckoo appears only for a short time in summer, and in winter

disappears. The hawk has crooked talons, which the cuckoo has not;

neither with regard to the head does the cuckoo resemble the hawk.

In point of fact, both as regards the head and the claws it more

resembles the pigeon. However, in colour and in colour alone it does

resemble the hawk, only that the markings of the hawk are striped, and

of the cuckoo mottled. And, by the way, in size and flight it

resembles the smallest of the hawk tribe, which bird disappears as a

rule about the time of the appearance of the cuckoo, though the two

have been seen simultaneously. The cuckoo has been seen to be preyed

on by the hawk; and this never happens between birds of the same

species. They say no one has ever seen the young of the cuckoo. The

bird eggs, but does not build a nest. Sometimes it lays its eggs in

the nest of a smaller bird after first devouring the eggs of this

bird; it lays by preference in the nest of the ringdove, after first

devouring the eggs of the pigeon. (It occasionally lays two, but

usually one.) It lays also in the nest of the hypolais, and the

hypolais hatches and rears the brood. It is about this time that the

bird becomes fat and palatable. (The young of hawks also get palatable

and fat. One species builds a nest in the wilderness and on sheer

and inaccessible cliffs.)

                                   8



    With most birds, as has been said of the pigeon, the hatching is

carried on by the male and the female in turns: with some birds,

however, the male only sits long enough to allow the female to provide

herself with food. In the goose tribe the female alone incubates,

and after once sitting on the eggs she continues brooding until they

are hatched.

    The nests of all marsh-birds are built in districts fenny and well

supplied with grass; consequently, the mother-bird while sitting quiet

on her eggs can provide herself with food without having to submit

to absolute fasting.

    With the crow also the female alone broods, and broods

throughout the whole period; the male bird supports the female,

bringing her food and feeding her. The female of the ring-dove

begins to brood in the afternoon and broods through the entire night

until breakfast-time of the following day; the male broods during

the rest of the time. Partridges build a nest in two compartments; the

male broods on the one and the female on the other. After hatching,

each of the parent birds rears its brood. But the male, when he

first takes his young out of the nest, treads them.

                                   9



    Peafowl live for about twenty-five years, breed about the third

year, and at the same time take on their spangled plumage. They

hatch their eggs within thirty days or rather more. The peahen lays

but once a year, and lays twelve eggs, or may be a slightly lesser

number: she does not lay all the eggs there and then one after the

other, but at intervals of two or three days. Such as lay for the

first time lay about eight eggs. The peahen lays wind-eggs. They

pair in the spring; and laying begins immediately after pairing. The

bird moults when the earliest trees are shedding their leaves, and

recovers its plumage when the same trees are recovering their foliage.

People that rear peafowl put the eggs under the barn-door hen, owing

to the fact that when the peahen is brooding over them the peacock

attacks her and tries to trample on them; owing to this circumstance

some birds of wild varieties run away from the males and lay their

eggs and brood in solitude. Only two eggs are put under a barn-door

hen, for she could not brood over and hatch a large number. They

take every precaution, by supplying her with food, to prevent her

going off the eggs and discontinuing the brooding.

    With male birds about pairing time the testicles are obviously

larger than at other times, and this is conspicuously the case with

the more salacious birds, such as the barn-door cock and the cock

partridge; the peculiarity is less conspicuous in such birds as are

intermittent in regard to pairing.

                                  10



    So much for the conception and generation of birds.

    It has been previously stated that fishes are not all oviparous.

Fishes of the cartilaginous genus are viviparous; the rest are

oviparous. And cartilaginous fishes are first oviparous internally and

subsequently viviparous; they rear the embryos internally, the

batrachus or fishing-frog being an exception.

    Fishes also, as was above stated, are provided with wombs, and

wombs of diverse kinds. The oviparous genera have wombs bifurcate in

shape and low down in position; the cartilaginous genus have wombs

shaped like those of O birds. The womb, however, in the

cartilaginous fishes differs in this respect from the womb of birds,

that with some cartilaginous fishes the eggs do not settle close to

the diaphragm but middle-ways along the backbone, and as they grow

they shift their position.

    The egg with all fishes is not of two colours within but is of

even hue; and the colour is nearer to white than to yellow, and that

both when the young is inside it and previously as well.

    Development from the egg in fishes differs from that in birds in

this respect, that it does not exhibit that one of the two

navel-strings that leads off to the membrane that lies close under the

shell, while it does exhibit that one of the two that in the case of

birds leads off to the yolk. In a general way the rest of the

development from the egg onwards is identical in birds and fishes.

That is to say, development takes place at the upper part of the

egg, and the veins extend in like manner, at first from the heart; and

at first the head, the eyes, and the upper parts are largest; and as

the creature grows the egg-substance decreases and eventually

disappears, and becomes absorbed within the embryo, just as takes

place with the yolk in birds.

    The navel-string is attached a little way below the aperture

of the belly. When the creatures are young the navel-string is long,

but as they grow it diminishes in size; at length it gets small and

becomes incorporated, as was described in the case of birds. The

embryo and the egg are enveloped by a common membrane, and just

under this is another membrane that envelops the embryo by itself; and

in between the two membranes is a liquid. The food inside the

stomach of the little fishes resembles that inside the stomach of

young chicks, and is partly white and partly yellow.

    As regards the shape of the womb, the reader is referred to my

treatise on Anatomy. The womb, however, is diverse in diverse

fishes, as for instance in the sharks as compared one with another

or as compared with the skate. That is to say, in some sharks the eggs

adhere in the middle of the womb round about the backbone, as has been

stated, and this is the case with the dog-fish; as the eggs grow

they shift their place; and since the womb is bifurcate and adheres to

the midriff, as in the rest of similar creatures, the eggs pass into

one or other of the two compartments. This womb and the womb of the

other sharks exhibit, as you go a little way off from the midriff,

something resembling white breasts, which never make their

appearance unless there be conception.

    Dog-fish and skate have a kind of egg-shell, in the which is

found an egg-like liquid. The shape of the egg-shell resembles the

tongue of a bagpipe, and hair-like ducts are attached to the shell.

With the dog-fish which is called by some the 'dappled shark', the

young are born when the shell-formation breaks in pieces and falls

out; with the ray, after it has laid the egg the shell-formation

breaks up and the young move out. The spiny dog-fish has its close

to the midriff above the breast like formations; when the egg

descends, as soon as it gets detached the young is born. The mode of

generation is the same in the case of the fox-shark.

    The so-called smooth shark has its eggs in betwixt the wombs

like the dog-fish; these eggs shift into each of the two horns of

the womb and descend, and the young develop with the navel-string

attached to the womb, so that, as the egg-substance gets used up,

the embryo is sustained to all appearance just as in the case of

quadrupeds. The navel-string is long and adheres to the under part

of the womb (each navel-string being attached as it were by a sucker),

and also to the centre of the embryo in the place where the liver is

situated. If the embryo be cut open, even though it has the

egg-substance no longer, the food inside is egg-like in appearance.

Each embryo, as in the case of quadrupeds, is provided with a

chorion and separate membranes. When young the embryo has its head

upwards, but downwards when it gets strong and is completed in form.

Males are generated on the left-hand side of the womb, and females

on the right-hand side, and males and females on the same side

together. If the embryo be cut open, then, as with quadrupeds, such

internal organs as it is furnished with, as for instance the liver,

are found to be large and supplied with blood.

    All cartilaginous fishes have at one and the same time eggs

above close to the midriff (some larger, some smaller), in

considerable numbers, and also embryos lower down. And this

circumstance leads many to suppose that fishes of this species pair

and bear young every month, inasmuch as they do not produce all

their young at once, but now and again and over a lengthened period.

But such eggs as have come down below within the womb are

simultaneously ripened and completed in growth.

    Dog-fish in general can extrude and take in again their young,

as can also the angel-fish and the electric ray-and, by the way, a

large electric ray has been seen with about eighty embryos inside

it-but the spiny dogfish is an exception to the rule, being

prevented by the spine of the young fish from so doing. Of the flat

cartilaginous fish, the trygon and the ray cannot extrude and take

in again in consequence of the roughness of the tails of the young.

The batrachus or fishing-frog also is unable to take in its young

owing to the size of the head and the prickles; and, by the way, as

was previously remarked, it is the only one of these fishes that is

not viviparous.

    So much for the varieties of the cartilaginous species and for

their modes of generation from the egg.

                                  11



    At the breeding season the sperm-ducts of the male are filled with

sperm, so much so that if they be squeezed the sperm flows out

spontaneously as a white fluid; the ducts are bifurcate, and start

from the midriff and the great vein. About this period the sperm-ducts

of the male are quite distinct (from the womb of the female) but at

any other than the actual breeding time their distinctness is not

obvious to a non-expert. The fact is that in certain fishes at certain

times these organs are imperceptible, as was stated regarding the

testicles of birds.

    Among other distinctions observed between the thoric ducts and the

womb-ducts is the circumstance that the thoric ducts are attached to

the loins, while the womb-ducts move about freely and are attached

by a thin membrane. The particulars regarding the thoric ducts may

be studied by a reference to the diagrams in my treatise on Anatomy.

    Cartilaginous fishes are capable of superfoetation, and their

period of gestation is six months at the longest. The so-called starry

dogfish bears young the most frequently; in other words it bears twice

a month. The breeding season is in the month of Maemacterion. The

dog-fish as a general rule bear twice in the year, with the

exception of the little dog-fish, which bears only once a year. Some

of them bring forth in the springtime. The rhine, or angel-fish, bears

its first brood in the springtime, and its second in the autumn, about

the winter setting of the Pleiads; the second brood is the stronger of

the two. The electric ray brings forth in the late autumn.

    Cartilaginous fishes come out from the main seas and deep waters

towards the shore and there bring forth their young, and they do so

for the sake of warmth and by way of protection for their young.

    Observations would lead to the general rule that no one

variety of fish pairs with another variety. The angel-fish, however,

and the batus or skate appear to pair with one another; for there is a

fish called the rhinobatus, with the head and front parts of the skate

and the after parts of the rhine or angel-fish, just as though it were

made up of both fishes together.

    Sharks then and their congeners, as the fox-shark and the

dog-fish, and the flat fishes, such as the electric ray, the ray,

the smooth skate, and the trygon, are first oviparous and then

viviparous in the way above mentioned, (as are also the saw-fish and

the ox-ray.)

                                  12



    The dolphin, the whale, and all the rest of the Cetacea, all, that

is to say, that are provided with a blow-hole instead of gills, are

viviparous. That is to say, no one of all these fishes is ever seen to

be supplied with eggs, but directly with an embryo from whose

differentiation comes the fish, just as in the case of mankind and the

viviparous quadrupeds.

    The dolphin bears one at a time generally, but occasionally two.

The whale bears one or at the most two, generally two. The porpoise in

this respect resembles the dolphin, and, by the way, it is in form

like a little dolphin, and is found in the Euxine; it differs,

however, from the dolphin as being less in size and broader in the

back; its colour is leaden-black. Many people are of opinion that

the porpoise is a variety of the dolphin.

    All creatures that have a blow-hole respire and inspire, for

they are provided with lungs. The dolphin has been seen asleep with

his nose above water, and when asleep he snores.

    The dolphin and the porpoise are provided with milk, and

suckle their young. They also take their young, when small, inside

them. The young of the dolphin grow rapidly, being full grown at ten

years of age. Its period of gestation is ten months. It brings forth

its young summer, and never at any other season; (and, singularly

enough, under the Dogstar it disappears for about thirty days). Its

young accompany it for a considerable period; and, in fact, the

creature is remarkable for the strength of its parental affection.

It lives for many years; some are known to have lived for more than

twenty-five, and some for thirty years; the fact is fishermen nick

their tails sometimes and set them adrift again, and by this expedient

their ages are ascertained.

    The seal is an amphibious animal: that is to say, it cannot take

in water, but breathes and sleeps and brings forth on dry land-only

close to the shore-as being an animal furnished with feet; it

spends, however, the greater part of its time in the sea and derives

its food from it, so that it must be classed in the category of marine

animals. It is viviparous by immediate conception and brings forth its

young alive, and exhibits an after-birth and all else just like a ewe.

It bears one or two at a time, and three at the most. It has two

teats, and suckles its young like a quadruped. Like the human

species it brings forth at all seasons of the year, but especially

at the time when the earliest kids are forthcoming. It conducts its

young ones, when they are about twelve days old, over and over again

during the day down to the sea, accustoming them by slow degrees to

the water. It slips down steep places instead of walking, from the

fact that it cannot steady itself by its feet. It can contract and

draw itself in, for it is fleshy and soft and its bones are gristly.

Owing to the flabbiness of its body it is difficult to kill a seal

by a blow, unless you strike it on the temple. It looks like a cow.

The female in regard to its genital organs resembles the female of the

ray; in all other respects it resembles the female of the human

species.

    So much for the phenomena of generation and of parturition in

animals that live in water and are viviparous either internally or

externally.

                                  13



    Oviparous fishes have their womb bifurcate and placed low down, as

was said previously-and, by the way, all scaly fish are oviparous,

as the basse, the mullet, the grey mullet, and the etelis, and all the

so-called white-fish, and all the smooth or slippery fish except the

eel-and their roe is of a crumbling or granular substance. This

appearance is due to the fact that the whole womb of such fishes is

full of eggs, so that in little fishes there seem to be only a

couple of eggs there; for in small fishes the womb is

indistinguishable, from its diminutive size and thin contexture. The

pairing of fishes has been discussed previously.

    Fishes for the most part are divided into males and females, but

one is puzzled to account for the erythrinus and the channa, for

specimens of these species are never caught except in a condition of

pregnancy.

    With such fish as pair, eggs are the result of copulation, but

such fish have them also without copulation; and this is shown in

the case of some river-fish, for the minnow has eggs when quite

small,-almost, one may say, as soon as it is born. These fishes shed

their eggs little by little, and, as is stated, the males swallow

the greater part of them, and some portion of them goes to waste in

the water; but such of the eggs as the female deposits on the spawning

beds are saved. If all the eggs were preserved, each species would

be infinite in number. The greater number of these eggs so deposited

are not productive, but only those over which the male sheds the

milt or sperm; for when the female has laid her eggs, the male follows

and sheds its sperm over them, and from all the eggs so besprinkled

young fishes proceed, while the rest are left to their fate.

    The same phenomenon is observed in the case of molluscs also;

for in the case of the cuttlefish or sepia, after the female has

deposited her eggs, the male besprinkles them. It is highly probable

that a similar phenomenon takes place in regard to molluscs in

general, though up to the present time the phenomenon has been

observed only in the case of the cuttlefish.

    Fishes deposit their eggs close in to shore, the goby close to

stones; and, by the way, the spawn of the goby is flat and crumbly.

Fish in general so deposit their eggs; for the water close in to shore

is warm and is better supplied with food than the outer sea, and

serves as a protection to the spawn against the voracity of the larger

fish. And it is for this reason that in the Euxine most fishes spawn

near the mouth of the river Thermodon, because the locality is

sheltered, genial, and supplied with fresh water.

    Oviparous fish as a rule spawn only once a year. The little

phycis or black goby is an exception, as it spawns twice; the male

of the black goby differs from the female as being blacker and

having larger scales.

    Fishes then in general produce their young by copulation, and

lay their eggs; but the pipefish, as some call it, when the time of

parturition arrives, bursts in two, and the eggs escape out. For the

fish has a diaphysis or cloven growth under the belly and abdomen

(like the blind snakes), and, after it has spawned by the splitting of

this diaphysis, the sides of the split grow together again.

    Development from the egg takes place similarly with fishes that

are oviparous internally and with fishes that are oviparous

externally; that is to say, the embryo comes at the upper end of the

egg and is enveloped in a membrane, and the eyes, large and spherical,

are the first organs visible. From this circumstance it is plain

that the assertion is untenable which is made by some writers, to wit,

that the young of oviparous fishes are generated like the grubs of

worms; for the opposite phenomena are observed in the case of these

grubs, in that their lower extremities are the larger at the outset,

and that the eyes and the head appear later on. After the egg has been

used up, the young fishes are like tadpoles in shape, and at first,

without taking any nutriment, they grow by sustenance derived from the

juice oozing from the egg; by and by, they are nourished up to full

growth by the river-waters.

    When the Euxine is 'purged' a substance called phycus is carried

into the Hellespont, and this substance is of a pale yellow colour.

Some writers aver that it is the flower of the phycus, from which

rouge is made; it comes at the beginning of summer. Oysters and the

small fish of these localities feed on this substance, and some of the

inhabitants of these maritime districts say that the purple murex

derives its peculiar colour from it.

                                  14



    Marsh-fishes and river-fishes conceive at the age of five months

as a general rule, and deposit their spawn towards the close of the

year without exception. And with these fishes, like as with the marine

fishes, the female does not void all her eggs at one time, nor the

male his sperm; but they are at all times more or less provided, the

female with eggs, and the male with sperm. The-carp spawns as the

seasons come round, five or six times, and follows in spawning the

rising of the greater constellations. The chalcis spawns three

times, and the other fishes once only in the year. They all spawn in

pools left by the overflowing of rivers, and near to reedy places in

marshes; as for instance the phoxinus or minnow and the perch.

    The glanis or sheat-fish and the perch deposit their spawn in

one continuous string, like the frog; so continuous, in fact, is the

convoluted spawn of the perch that, by reason of its smoothness, the

fishermen in the marshes can unwind it off the reeds like threads

off a reel. The larger individuals of the sheat-fish spawn in deep

waters, some in water of a fathom's depth, the smaller in shallower

water, generally close to the roots of the willow or of some other

tree, or close to reeds or to moss. At times these fishes intertwine

with one another, a big with a little one, and bring into

juxtaposition the ducts-which some writers designate as navels-at

the point where they emit the generative products and discharge the

egg in the case of the female and the milt in the case of the male.

Such eggs as are besprinkled with the milt grow, in a day or

thereabouts, whiter and larger, and in a little while afterwards the

fish's eyes become visible for these organs in all fishes, as for that

matter in all other animals, are early conspicuous and seem

disproportionately big. But such eggs as the milt fails to touch

remain, as with marine fishes, useless and infertile. From the fertile

eggs, as the little fish grow, a kind of sheath detaches itself;

this is a membrane that envelops the egg and the young fish. When

the milt has mingled with the eggs, the resulting product becomes very

sticky or viscous, and adheres to the roots of trees or wherever it

may have been laid. The male keeps on guard at the principal

spawning-place, and the female after spawning goes away.

    In the case of the sheat-fish the growth from the egg is

exceptionally slow, and, in consequence, the male has to keep watch

for forty or fifty days to prevent the-spawn being devoured by such

little fishes as chance to come by. Next in point of slowness is the

generation of the carp. As with fishes in general, so even with these,

the spawn thus protected disappears and gets lost rapidly.

    In the case of some of the smaller fishes when they are only

three days old young fishes are generated. Eggs touched by the male

sperm take on increase both the same day and also later. The egg of

the sheat-fish is as big as a vetch-seed; the egg of the carp and of

the carp-species as big as a millet-seed.

    These fishes then spawn and generate in the way here

described. The chalcis, however, spawns in deep water in dense

shoals of fish; and the so-called tilon spawns near to beaches in

sheltered spots in shoals likewise. The carp, the baleros, and

fishes in general push eagerly into the shallows for the purpose of

spawning, and very often thirteen or fourteen males are seen following

a single female. When the female deposits her spawn and departs, the

males follow on and shed the milt. The greater portion of the spawn

gets wasted; because, owing to the fact that the female moves about

while spawning, the spawn scatters, or so much of it as is caught in

the stream and does not get entangled with some rubbish. For, with the

exception of the sheatfish, no fish keeps on guard; unless, by the

way, it be the carp, which is said to remain on guard, if it so happen

that its spawn lies in a solid mass.

    All male fishes are supplied with milt, excepting the eel: with

the eel, the male is devoid of milt, and the female of spawn. The

mullet goes up from the sea to marshes and rivers; the eels, on the

contrary, make their way down from the marshes and rivers to the sea.

                                  15



    The great majority of fish, then, as has been stated, proceed from

eggs. However, there are some fish that proceed from mud and sand,

even of those kinds that proceed also from pairing and the egg. This

occurs in ponds here and there, and especially in a pond in the

neighbourhood of Cnidos. This pond, it is said, at one time ran dry

about the rising of the Dogstar, and the mud had all dried up; at

the first fall of the rains there was a show of water in the pond, and

on the first appearance of the water shoals of tiny fish were found in

the pond. The fish in question was a kind of mullet, one which does

not proceed from normal pairing, about the size of a small sprat,

and not one of these fishes was provided with either spawn or milt.

There are found also in Asia Minor, in rivers not communicating with

the sea, little fishes like whitebait, differing from the small fry

found near Cnidos but found under similar circumstances. Some

writers actually aver that mullet all grow spontaneously. In this

assertion they are mistaken, for the female of the fish is found

provided with spawn, and the male with milt. However, there is a

species of mullet that grows spontaneously out of mud and sand.

    From the facts above enumerated it is quite proved that certain

fishes come spontaneously into existence, not being derived from

eggs or from copulation. Such fish as are neither oviparous nor

viviparous arise all from one of two sources, from mud, or from sand

and from decayed matter that rises thence as a scum; for instance, the

so-called froth of the small fry comes out of sandy ground. This fry

is incapable of growth and of propagating its kind; after living for a

while it dies away and another creature takes its place, and so,

with short intervals excepted, it may be said to last the whole year

through. At all events, it lasts from the autumn rising of Arcturus up

to the spring-time. As a proof that these fish occasionally come out

of the ground we have the fact that in cold weather they are not

caught, and that they are caught in warm weather, obviously coming

up out of the ground to catch the heat; also, when the fishermen use

dredges and the ground is scraped up fairly often, the fishes appear

in larger numbers and of superior quality. All other small fry are

inferior in quality owing to rapidity of growth. The fry are found

in sheltered and marshy districts, when after a spell of fine

weather the ground is getting warmer, as, for instance, in the

neighbourhood of Athens, at Salamis and near the tomb of

Themistocles and at Marathon; for in these districts the froth is

found. It appears, then, in such districts and during such weather,

and occasionally appears after a heavy fall of rain in the froth

that is thrown up by the falling rain, from which circumstance the

substance derives its specific name. Foam is occasionally brought in

on the surface of the sea in fair weather. (And in this, where it

has formed on the surface, the so-called froth collects, as grubs

swarm in manure; for which-reason this fry is often brought in from

the open sea. The fish is at its best in quality and quantity in moist

warm weather.)

    The ordinary fry is the normal issue of parent fishes: the

so-called gudgeon-fry of small insignificant gudgeon-like fish that

burrow under the ground. From the Phaleric fry comes the membras, from

the membras the trichis, from the trichis the trichias, and from one

particular sort of fry, to wit from that found in the harbour of

Athens, comes what is called the encrasicholus, or anchovy. There is

another fry, derived from the maenis and the mullet.

    The unfertile fry is watery and keeps only a short time, as

has been stated, for at last only head and eyes are left. However, the

fishermen of late have hit upon a method of transporting it to a

distance, as when salted it keeps for a considerable time.

                                  16



    Eels are not the issue of pairing, neither are they oviparous; nor

was an eel ever found supplied with either milt or spawn, nor are they

when cut open found to have within them passages for spawn or for

eggs. In point of fact, this entire species of blooded animals

proceeds neither from pair nor from the egg.

    There can be no doubt that the case is so. For in some standing

pools, after the water has been drained off and the mud has been

dredged away, the eels appear again after a fall of rain. In time of

drought they do not appear even in stagnant ponds, for the simple

reason that their existence and sustenance is derived from rain-water.

    There is no doubt, then, that they proceed neither from

pairing nor from an egg. Some writers, however, are of opinion that

they generate their kind, because in some eels little worms are found,

from which they suppose that eels are derived. But this opinion is not

founded on fact. Eels are derived from the so-called 'earth's guts'

that grow spontaneously in mud and in humid ground; in fact, eels have

at times been seen to emerge out of such earthworms, and on other

occasions have been rendered visible when the earthworms were laid

open by either scraping or cutting. Such earthworms are found both

in the sea and in rivers, especially where there is decayed matter: in

the sea in places where sea-weed abounds, and in rivers and marshes

near to the edge; for it is near to the water's edge that sun-heat has

its chief power and produces putrefaction. So much for the

generation of the eel.

                                  17



    Fish do not all bring forth their young at the same season nor all

in like manner, neither is the period of gestation for all of the same

duration.

    Before pairing the males and females gather together in

shoals; at the time for copulation and parturition they pair off. With

some fishes the time of gestation is not longer than thirty days, with

others it is a lesser period; but with all it extends over a number of

days divisible by seven. The longest period of gestation is that of

the species which some call a marinus.

    The sargue conceives during the month of Poseideon (or

December), and carries its spawn for thirty days; and the species of

mullet named by some the chelon, and the myxon, go with spawn at the

same period and over the same length of time.

    All fish suffer greatly during the period of gestation, and

are in consequence very apt to be thrown up on shore at this time.

In some cases they are driven frantic with pain and throw themselves

on land. At all events they are throughout this time continually in

motion until parturition is over (this being especially true of the

mullet), and after parturition they are in repose. With many fish

the time for parturition terminates on the appearance of grubs

within the belly; for small living grubs get generated there and eat

up the spawn.

    With shoal fishes parturition takes place in the spring, and

indeed, with most fishes, about the time of the spring equinox; with

others it is at different times, in summer with some, and with

others about the autumn equinox.

    The first of shoal fishes to spawn is the atherine, and it

spawns close to land; the last is the cephalus: and this is inferred

from the fact that the brood of the atherine appears first of all

and the brood of the cephalus last. The mullet also spawns early.

The saupe spawns usually at the beginning of summer, but

occasionally in the autumn. The aulopias, which some call the anthias,

spawns in the summer. Next in order of spawning comes the

chrysophrys or gilthead, the basse, the mormyrus, and in general

such fish as are nicknamed 'runners'. Latest in order of the shoal

fish come the red mullet and the coracine; these spawn in autumn.

The red mullet spawns on mud, and consequently, as the mud continues

cold for a long while, spawns late in the year. The coracine carries

its spawn for a long time; but, as it lives usually on rocky ground,

it goes to a distance and spawns in places abounding in seaweed, at

a period later than the red mullet. The maenis spawns about the winter

solstice. Of the others, such as are pelagic spawn for the most part

in summer; which fact is proved by their not being caught by fishermen

during this period.

    Of ordinary fishes the most prolific is the sprat; of

cartilaginous fishes, the fishing-frog. Specimens, however, of the

fishing-frog are rare from the facility with which the young are

destroyed, as the female lays her spawn all in a lump close in to

shore. As a rule, cartilaginous fish are less prolific than other fish

owing to their being viviparous; and their young by reason of their

size have a better chance of escaping destruction.

    The so-called needle-fish (or pipe-fish) is late in spawning,

and the greater portion of them are burst asunder by the eggs before

spawning; and the eggs are not so many in number as large in size. The

young fish cluster round the parent like so many young spiders, for

the fish spawns on to herself; and, if any one touch the young, they

swim away. The atherine spawns by rubbing its belly against the sand.

    Tunny fish also burst asunder by reason of their fat. They live

for two years; and the fishermen infer this age from the

circumstance that once when there was a failure of the young tunny

fish for a year there was a failure of the full-grown tunny the next

summer. They are of opinion that the tunny is a fish a year older than

the pelamyd. The tunny and the mackerel pair about the close of the

month of Elaphebolion, and spawn about the commencement of the month

of Hecatombaeon; they deposit their spawn in a sort of bag. The growth

of the young tunny is rapid. After the females have spawned in the

Euxine, there comes from the egg what some call scordylae, but what

the Byzantines nickname the 'auxids' or 'growers', from their

growing to a considerable size in a few days; these fish go out of the

Pontus in autumn along with the young tunnies, and enter Pontus in the

spring as pelamyds. Fishes as a rule take on growth with rapidity, but

this is peculiarly the case with all species of fish found in the

Pontus; the growth, for instance, of the amia-tunny is quite visible

from day to day.

    To resume, we must bear in mind that the same fish in the same

localities have not the same season for pairing, for conception, for

parturition, or for favouring weather. The coracine, for instance,

in some places spawns about wheat-harvest. The statements here given

pretend only to give the results of general observation.

    The conger also spawns, but the fact is not equally obvious in

all localities, nor is the spawn plainly visible owing to the fat of

the fish; for the spawn is lanky in shape as it is with serpents.

However, if it be put on the fire it shows its nature; for the fat

evaporates and melts, while the eggs dance about and explode with a

crack. Further, if you touch the substances and rub them with your

fingers, the fat feels smooth and the egg rough. Some congers are

provided with fat but not with any spawn, others are unprovided with

fat but have egg-spawn as here described.

                                  18



    We have, then, treated pretty fully of the animals that fly in the

air or swim in the water, and of such of those that walk on dry land

as are oviparous, to wit of their pairing, conception, and the like

phenomena; it now remains to treat of the same phenomena in

connexion with viviparous land animals and with man.

    The statements made in regard to the pairing of the sexes

apply partly to the particular kinds of animal and partly to all in

general. It is common to all animals to be most excited by the

desire of one sex for the other and by the pleasure derived from

copulation. The female is most cross-tempered just after

parturition, the male during the time of pairing; for instance,

stallions at this period bite one another, throw their riders, and

chase them. Wild boars, though usually enfeebled at this time as the

result of copulation, are now unusually fierce, and fight with one

another in an extraordinary way, clothing themselves with defensive

armour, or in other words deliberately thickening their hide by

rubbing against trees or by coating themselves repeatedly all over

with mud and then drying themselves in the sun. They drive one another

away from the swine pastures, and fight with such fury that very often

both combatants succumb. The case is similar with bulls, rams, and

he-goats; for, though at ordinary times they herd together, at

breeding time they hold aloof from and quarrel with one another. The

male camel also is cross-tempered at pairing time if either a man or a

camel comes near him; as for a horse, a camel is ready to fight him at

any time. It is the same with wild animals. The bear, the wolf, and

the lion are all at this time ferocious towards such as come in

their way, but the males of these animals are less given to fight with

one another from the fact that they are at no time gregarious. The

she-bear is fierce after cubbing, and the bitch after pupping.

    Male elephants get savage about pairing time, and for this

reason it is stated that men who have charge of elephants in India

never allow the males to have intercourse with the females; on the

ground that the males go wild at this time and turn topsy-turvy the

dwellings of their keepers, lightly constructed as they are, and

commit all kinds of havoc. They also state that abundancy of food

has a tendency to tame the males. They further introduce other

elephants amongst the wild ones, and punish and break them in by

setting on the new-comers to chastise the others.

    Animals that pair frequently and not at a single specific

season, as for instance animals domesticated by man, such as swine and

dogs, are found to indulge in such freaks to a lesser degree owing

to the frequency of their sexual intercourse.

    Of female animals the mare is the most sexually wanton, and next

in order comes the cow. In fact, the mare is said to go a-horsing; and

the term derived from the habits of this one animal serves as a term

of abuse applicable to such females of the human species as are

unbridled in the way of sexual appetite. This is the common phenomenon

as observed in the sow when she is said to go a-boaring. The mare is

said also about this time to get wind-impregnated if not impregnated

by the stallion, and for this reason in Crete they never remove the

stallion from the mares; for when the mare gets into this condition

she runs away from all other horses. The mares under these

circumstances fly invariably either northwards or southwards, and

never towards either east or west. When this complaint is on them they

allow no one to approach, until either they are exhausted with fatigue

or have reached the sea. Under either of these circumstances they

discharge a certain substance 'hippomanes', the title given to a

growth on a new-born foal; this resembles the sow-virus, and is in

great request amongst women who deal in drugs and potions. About

horsing time the mares huddle closer together, are continually

switching their tails, their neigh is abnormal in sound, and from

the sexual organ there flows a liquid resembling genital sperm, but

much thinner than the sperm of the male. It is this substance that

some call hippomanes, instead of the growth found on the foal; they

say it is extremely difficult to get as it oozes out only in small

drops at a time. Mares also, when in heat, discharge urine frequently,

and frisk with one another. Such are the phenomena connected with

the horse.

    Cows go a-bulling; and so completely are they under the

influence of the sexual excitement that the herdsmen have no control

over them and cannot catch hold of them in the fields. Mares and

kine alike, when in heat, indicate the fact by the upraising of

their genital organs, and by continually voiding urine. Further,

kine mount the bulls, follow them about; and keep standing beside

them. The younger females both with horses and oxen are the first to

get in heat; and their sexual appetites are all the keener if the

weather warm and their bodily condition be healthy. Mares, when

clipt of their coat, have the sexual feeling checked, and assume a

downcast drooping appearance. The stallion recognizes by the scent the

mares that form his company, even though they have been together

only a few days before breeding time: if they get mixed up with

other mares, the stallion bites and drives away the interlopers. He

feeds apart, accompanied by his own troop of mares. Each stallion

has assigned to him about thirty mares or even somewhat more; when a

strange stallion approaches, he huddles his mares into a close ring,

runs round them, then advances to the encounter of the newcomer; if

one of the mares make a movement, he bites her and drives her back.

The bull in breeding time begins to graze with the cows, and fights

with other bulls (having hitherto grazed with them), which is termed

by graziers 'herd-spurning'. Often in Epirus a bull disappears for

three months together. In a general way one may state that of male

animals either none or few herd with their respective females before

breeding time; but they keep separate after reaching maturity, and the

two sexes feed apart. Sows, when they are moved by sexual desire, or

are, as it is called, a-boaring, will attack even human beings.

    With bitches the same sexual condition is termed 'getting into

heat'. The sexual organ rises at this time, and there is a moisture

about the parts. Mares drip with a white liquid at this season.

    Female animals are subject to menstrual discharges, but never in

such-abundance as is the female of the human species. With ewes and

she-goats there are signs of menstruation in breeding time, just

before the for submitting to the male; after copulation also the signs

are manifest, and then cease for an interval until the period of

parturition arrives; the process then supervenes, and it is by this

supervention that the shepherd knows that such and such an ewe is

about to bring forth. After parturition comes copious menstruation,

not at first much tinged with blood, but deeply dyed with it by and

by. With the cow, the she ass, and the mare, the discharge is more

copious actually, owing to their greater bulk, but proportionally to

the greater bulk it is far less copious. The cow, for instance, when

in heat, exhibits a small discharge to the extent of a quarter of a

pint of liquid or a little less; and the time when this discharge

takes place is the best time for her to be covered by the bull. Of all

quadrupeds the mare is the most easily delivered of its young,

exhibits the least amount of discharge after parturition, and emits

the least amount of blood; that is to say, of all animals in

proportion to size. With kine and mares menstruation usually manifests

itself at intervals of two, four, and six months; but, unless one be

constantly attending to and thoroughly acquainted with such animals,

it is difficult to verify the circumstance, and the result is that

many people are under the belief that the process never takes place

with these animals at all.

    With mules menstruation never takes place, but the urine of the

female is thicker than the urine of the male. As a general rule the

discharge from the bladder in the case of quadrupeds is thicker than

it is in the human species, and this discharge with ewes and she-goats

is thicker than with rams and he-goats; but the urine of the jackass

is thicker than the urine of the she-ass, and the urine of the bull is

more pungent than the urine of the cow. After parturition the urine of

all quadrupeds becomes thicker, especially with such animals as

exhibit comparatively slight discharges. At breeding time the milk

become purulent, but after parturition it becomes wholesome. During

pregnancy ewes and she-goats get fatter and eat more; as is also the

case with cows, and, indeed, with the females of all quadrupeds.

    In general the sexual appetites of animals are keenest in

spring-time; the time of pairing, however, is not the same for all,

but is adapted so as to ensure the rearing of the young at a

convenient season.

    Domesticated swine carry their young for four months, and

bring forth a litter of twenty at the utmost; and, by the way, if

the litter be exceedingly numerous they cannot rear all the young.

As the sow grows old she continues to bear, but grows indifferent to

the boar; she conceives after a single copulation, but they have to

put the boar to her repeatedly owing to her dropping after intercourse

what is called the sow-virus. This incident befalls all sows, but some

of them discharge the genital sperm as well. During conception any one

of the litter that gets injured or dwarfed is called an afterpig or

scut: such injury may occur at any part of the womb. After littering

the mother offers the foremost teat to the first-born. When the sow is

in heat, she must not at once be put to the boar, but only after she

lets her lugs drop, for otherwise she is apt to get into heat again;

if she be put to the boar when in full condition of heat, one

copulation, as has been said, is sufficient. It is as well to supply

the boar at the period of copulation with barley, and the sow at the

time of parturition with boiled barley. Some swine give fine litters

only at the beginning, with others the litters improve as the

mothers grow in age and size. It is said that a sow, if she have one

of her eyes knocked out, is almost sure to die soon afterwards.

Swine for the most part live for fifteen years, but some fall little

short of the twenty.

                                  19



    Ewes conceive after three or four copulations with the ram. If

rain falls after intercourse, the ram impregnates the ewe again; and

it is the same with the she-goat. The ewe bears usually two lambs,

sometimes three or four. Both ewe and she-goat carry their young for

five months; consequently wherever a district is sunny and the animals

are used to comfort and well fed, they bear twice in the year. The

goat lives for eight years and the sheep for ten, but in most cases

not so long; the bell-wether, however, lives to fifteen years. In

every flock they train one of the rams for bell-wether. When he is

called on by name by the shepherd, he takes the lead of the flock: and

to this duty the creature is trained from its earliest years. Sheep in

Ethiopia live for twelve or thirteen years, goats for ten or eleven.

In the case of the sheep and the goat the two sexes have intercourse

all their lives long.

    Twins with sheep and goats may be due to richness of

pasturage, or to the fact that either the ram or the he-goat is a

twin-begetter or that the ewe or the she-goat is a twin-bearer. Of

these animals some give birth to males and others to females; and

the difference in this respect depends on the waters they drink and

also on the sires. And if they submit to the male when north winds are

blowing, they are apt to bear males; if when south winds are

blowing, females. Such as bear females may get to bear males, due

regard being paid to their looking northwards when put to the male.

Ewes accustomed to be put to the ram early will refuse him if he

attempt to mount them late. Lambs are born white and black according

as white or black veins are under the ram's tongue; the lambs are

white if the veins are white, and black if the veins are black, and

white and black if the veins are white and black; and red if the veins

are red. The females that drink salted waters are the first to take


the male; the water should be salted before and after parturition, and

again in the springtime. With goats the shepherds appoint no

bell-wether, as the animal is not capable of repose but frisky and apt

to ramble. If at the appointed season the elders of the flock are

eager for intercourse, the shepherds say that it bodes well for the

flock; if the younger ones, that the flock is going to be bad.

                                  20



    Of dogs there are several breeds. Of these the Laconian hound of

either sex is fit for breeding purposes when eight months old: at

about the same age some dogs lift the leg when voiding urine. The

bitch conceives with one lining; this is clearly seen in the case

where a dog contrives to line a bitch by stealth, as they impregnate

after mounting only once. The Laconian bitch carries her young the

sixth part of a year or sixty days: or more by one, two, or three,

or less by one; the pups are blind for twelve days after birth.

After pupping, the bitch gets in heat again in six months, but not

before. Some bitches carry their young for the fifth part of the

year or for seventy-two days; and their pups are blind for fourteen

days. Other bitches carry their young for a quarter of a year or for

three whole months; and the whelps of these are blind for seventeen

days. The bitch appears go in heat for the same length of time.

Menstruation continues for seven days, and a swelling of the genital

organ occurs simultaneously; it is not during this period that the

bitch is disposed to submit to the dog, but in the seven days that

follow. The bitch as a rule goes in heat for fourteen days, but

occasionally for sixteen. The birth-discharge occurs simultaneously

with the delivery of the whelps, and the substance of it is thick

and mucous. (The falling-off in bulk on the part of the mother is

not so great as might have been inferred from the size of her

frame.) The bitch is usually supplied with milk five days before

parturition; some seven days previously, some four; and the milk is

serviceable immediately after birth. The Laconian bitch is supplied

with milk thirty days after lining. The milk at first is thickish, but

gets thinner by degrees; with the bitch the milk is thicker than

with the female of any other animal excepting the sow and the hare.

When the bitch arrives at full growth an indication is given of her

capacity for the male; that is to say, just as occurs in the female of

the human species, a swelling takes place in the teats of the breasts,

and the breasts take on gristle. This incident, however, it is

difficult for any but an expert to detect, as the part that gives

the indication is inconsiderable. The preceding statements relate to

the female, and not one of them to the male. The male as a rule

lifts his leg to void urine when six months old; some at a later

period, when eight months old, some before they reach six months. In a

general way one may put it that they do so when they are out of

puppyhood. The bitch squats down when she voids urine; it is a rare

exception that she lifts the leg to do so. The bitch bears twelve pups

at the most, but usually five or six; occasionally a bitch will bear

one only. The bitch of the Laconian breed generally bears eight. The

two sexes have intercourse with each other at all periods of life. A

very remarkable phenomenon is observed in the case of the Laconian

hound: in other words, he is found to be more vigorous in commerce

with the female after being hard-worked than when allowed to live

idle.

    The dog of the Laconian breed lives ten years, and the bitch

twelve. The bitch of other breeds usually lives for fourteen or

fifteen years, but some live to twenty; and for this reason certain

critics consider that Homer did well in representing the dog of

Ulysses as having died in his twentieth year. With the Laconian hound,

owing to the hardships to which the male is put, he is less long-lived

than the female; with other breeds the distinction as to longevity

is not very apparent, though as a general rule the male is the

longer-lived.

    The dog sheds no teeth except the so-called 'canines'; these a dog

of either sex sheds when four months old. As they shed these only,

many people are in doubt as to the fact, and some people, owing to

their shedding but two and its being hard to hit upon the time when

they do so, fancy that the animal sheds no teeth at all; others, after

observing the shedding of two, come to the conclusion that the

creature sheds the rest in due turn. Men discern the age of a dog by

inspection of its teeth; with young dogs the teeth are white and sharp

pointed, with old dogs black and blunted.

                                  21



    The bull impregnates the cow at a single mount, and mounts with

such vigour as to weigh down the cow; if his effort be unsuccessful,

the cow must be allowed an interval of twenty days before being

again submitted. Bulls of mature age decline to mount the same cow

several times on one day, except, by the way, at considerable

intervals. Young bulls by reason of their vigour are enabled to

mount the same cow several times in one day, and a good many cows

besides. The bull is the least salacious of male animals.... The

victor among the bulls is the one that mounts the females; when he

gets exhausted by his amorous efforts, his beaten antagonist sets on

him and very often gets the better of the conflict. The bull and the

cow are about a year old when it is possible for them to have commerce

with chance of offspring: as a rule, however, they are about twenty

months old, but it is universally allowed that they are capable in

this respect at the age of two years. The cow goes with calf for

nine months, and she calves in the tenth month; some maintain that

they go in calf for ten months, to the very day. A calf delivered

before the times here specified is an abortion and never lives,

however little premature its birth may have been, as its hooves are

weak and imperfect. The cow as a rule bears but one calf, very

seldom two; she submits to the bull and bears as long as she lives.

    Cows live for about fifteen years, and the bulls too, if they

have been castrated; but some live for twenty years or even more, if

their bodily constitutions be sound. The herdsmen tame the castrated

bulls, and give them an office in the herd analogous to the office

of the bell-wether in a flock; and these bulls live to an

exceptionally advanced age, owing to their exemption from hardship and

to their browsing on pasture of good quality. The bull is in fullest

vigour when five years old, which leads the critics to commend Homer

for applying to the bull the epithets of 'five-year-old', or 'of

nine seasons', which epithets are alike in meaning. The ox sheds his

teeth at the age of two years, not all together but just as the

horse sheds his. When the animal suffers from podagra it does not shed

the hoof, but is subject to a painful swelling in the feet. The milk

of the cow is serviceable after parturition, and before parturition

there is no milk at all. The milk that first presents itself becomes

as hard as stone when it clots; this result ensues unless it be

previously diluted with water. Oxen younger than a year old do not

copulate unless under circumstances of an unnatural and portentous

kind: instances have been recorded of copulation in both sexes at

the age of four months. Kine in general begin to submit to the male

about the month of Thargelion or of Scirophorion; some, however, are

capable of conception right on to the autumn. When kine in large

numbers receive the bull and conceive, it is looked upon as prognostic

of rain and stormy weather. Kine herd together like mares, but in

lesser degree.

                                  22



    In the case of horses, the stallion and the mare are first

fitted for breeding purposes when two years old. Instances, however,

of such early maturity are rare, and their young are exceptionally

small and weak; the ordinary age for sexual maturity is three years,

and from that age to twenty the two sexes go on improving in the

quality of their offspring. The mare carries her foal for eleven

months, and casts it in the twelfth. It is not a fixed number of

days that the stallion takes to impregnate the mare; it may be one,

two, three, or more. An ass in covering will impregnate more

expeditiously than a stallion. The act of intercourse with horses is

not laborious as it is with oxen. In both sexes the horse is the

most salacious of animals next after the human species. The breeding

faculties of the younger horses may be stimulated beyond their years

if they be supplied with good feeding in abundance. The mare as a rule

bears only one foal; occasionally she has two, but never more. A

mare has been known to cast two mules; but such a circumstance was

regarded as unnatural and portentous.

    The horse then is first fitted for breeding purposes at the

age of two and a half years, but achieves full sexual maturity when it

has ceased to shed teeth, except it be naturally infertile; it must be

added, however, that some horses have been known to impregnate the

mare while the teeth were in process of shedding.

    The horse has forty teeth. It sheds its first set of four, two

from the upper jaw and two from the lower, when two and a half years

old. After a year's interval, it sheds another set of four in like

manner, and another set of four after yet another year's interval;

after arriving at the age of four years and six months it sheds no

more. An instance has occurred where a horse shed all his teeth at

once, and another instance of a horse shedding all his teeth with

his last set of four; but such instances are very rare. It

consequently happens that a horse when four and a half years old is in

excellent condition for breeding purposes.

    The older horses, whether of the male or female, are the more

generatively productive. Horses will cover mares from which they

have been foaled and mares which they have begotten; and, indeed, a

troop of horses is only considered perfect when such promiscuity of

intercourse occurs. Scythians use pregnant mares for riding when the

embryo has turned rather soon in the womb, and they assert that

thereby the mothers have all the easier delivery. Quadrupeds as a rule

lie down for parturition, and in consequence the young of them all

come out of the womb sideways. The mare, however, when the time for

parturition arrives, stands erect and in that posture casts its foal.

    The horse in general lives for eighteen or twenty years; some

horses live for twenty-five or even thirty, and if a horse be

treated with extreme care, it may last on to the age of fifty years; a

horse, however, when it reaches thirty years is regarded as

exceptionally old. The mare lives usually for twenty-five years,

though instances have occurred of their attaining the age of forty.

The male is less long-lived than the female by reason of the sexual

service he is called on to render; and horses that are reared in a

private stable live longer than such as are reared in troops. The mare

attains her full length and height at five years old, the stallion

at six; in another six years the animal reaches its full bulk, and

goes on improving until it is twenty years old. The female, then,

reaches maturity more rapidly than the male, but in the womb the

case is reversed, just as is observed in regard to the sexes of the

human species; and the same phenomenon is observed in the case of

all animals that bear several young.

    The mare is said to suckle a mule-foal for six months, but not

to allow its approach for any longer on account of the pain it is

put to by the hard tugging of the young; an ordinary foal it allows to

suck for a longer period.

    Horse and mule are at their best after the shedding of the

teeth. After they have shed them all, it is not easy to distinguish

their age; hence they are said to carry their mark before the

shedding, but not after. However, even after the shedding their age is

pretty well recognized by the aid of the canines; for in the case of

horses much ridden these teeth are worn away by attrition caused by

the insertion of the bit; in the case of horses not ridden the teeth

are large and detached, and in young horses they are sharp and small.

    The male of the horse will breed at all seasons and during its

whole life; the mare can take the horse all its life long, but is

not thus ready to pair at all seasons unless it be held in check by

a halter or some other compulsion be brought to bear. There is no

fixed time at which intercourse of the two sexes cannot take place;

and accordingly intercourse may chance to take place at a time that

may render difficult the rearing of the future progeny. In a stable in

Opus there was a stallion that used to serve mares when forty years

old: his fore legs had to be lifted up for the operation.

    Mares first take the horse in the spring-time. After a mare

has foaled she does not get impregnated at once again, but only

after a considerable interval; in fact, the foals will be all the

better if the interval extend over four or five years. It is, at all

events, absolutely necessary to allow an interval of one year, and for

that period to let her lie fallow. A mare, then, breeds at

intervals; a she-ass breeds on and on without intermission. Of mares

some are absolutely sterile, others are capable of conception but

incapable of bringing the foal to full term; it is said to be an

indication of this condition in a mare, that her foal if dissected

is found to have other kidney-shaped substances round about its

kidneys, presenting the appearance of having four kidneys.

    After parturition the mare at once swallows the after-birth, and

bites off the growth, called the 'hippomanes', that is found on the

forehead of the foal. This growth is somewhat smaller than a dried

fig; and in shape is broad and round, and in colour black. If any

bystander gets possession of it before the mare, and the mare gets a

smell of it, she goes wild and frantic at the smell. And it is for

this reason that venders of drugs and simples hold the substance in

high request and include it among their stores.

    If an ass cover a mare after the mare has been covered by a

horse, the ass will destroy the previously formed embryo.

    (Horse-trainers do not appoint a horse as leader to a troop, as

herdsmen appoint a bull as leader to a herd, and for this reason

that the horse is not steady but quick-tempered and skittish.)

                                  23



    The ass of both sexes is capable of breeding, and sheds its

first teeth at the age of two and a half years; it sheds its second

teeth within six months, its third within another six months, and

the fourth after the like interval. These fourth teeth are termed

the gnomons or age-indicators.

    A she-ass has been known to conceive when a year old, and the

foal to be reared. After intercourse with the male it will discharge

the genital sperm unless it be hindered, and for this reason it is

usually beaten after such intercourse and chased about. It casts its

young in the twelfth month. It usually bears but one foal, and that is

its natural number, occasionally however it bears twins. The ass if it

cover a mare destroys, as has been said, the embryo previously

begotten by the horse; but, after the mare has been covered by the

ass, the horse supervening will not spoil the embryo. The she-ass

has milk in the tenth month of pregnancy. Seven days after casting a

foal the she-ass submits to the male, and is almost sure to conceive

if put to the male on this particular day; the same result, however,

is quite possible later on. The she-ass will refuse to cast her foal

with any one looking on or in the daylight and just before foaling she

has to be led away into a dark place. If the she-ass has had young

before the shedding of the index-teeth, she will bear all her life

through; but if not, then she will neither conceive nor bear for the

rest of her days. The ass lives for more than thirty years, and the

she-ass lives longer than the male.

    When there is a cross between a horse and a she-ass or a jackass

and a mare, there is much greater chance of a miscarriage than where

the commerce is normal. The period for gestation in the case of a

cross depends on the male, and is just what it would have been if

the male had had commerce with a female of his own kind. In regard

to size, looks, and vigour, the foal is more apt to resemble the

mother than the sire. If such hybrid connexions be continued without

intermittence, the female will soon go sterile; and for this reason

trainers always allow of intervals between breeding times. A mare will

not take the ass, nor a she ass the horse, unless the ass or she-ass

shall have been suckled by a mare; and for this reason trainers put

foals of the she-ass under mares, which foals are technically spoken

of as 'mare-suckled'. These asses, thus reared, mount the mares in the

open pastures, mastering them by force as the stallions do.

                                  24



    A mule is fitted for commerce with the female after the first

shedding of its teeth, and at the age of seven will impregnate

effectually; and where connexion has taken place with a mare, a

'hinny' has been known to be produced. After the seventh year it has

no further intercourse with the female. A female mule has been known

to be impregnated, but without the impregnation being followed up by

parturition. In Syrophoenicia she-mules submit to the mule and bear

young; but the breed, though it resembles the ordinary one, is

different and specific. The hinny or stunted mule is foaled by a

mare when she has gone sick during gestation, and corresponds to the

dwarf in the human species and to the after-pig or scut in swine;

and as is the case with dwarfs, the sexual organ of the hinny is

abnormally large.

    The mule lives for a number of years. There are on record

cases of mules living to the age of eighty, as did one in Athens at

the time of the building of the temple; this mule on account of its

age was let go free, but continued to assist in dragging burdens,

and would go side by side with the other draught-beasts and

stimulate them to their work; and in consequence a public decree was

passed forbidding any baker driving the creature away from his

bread-tray. The she-mule grows old more slowly than the mule. Some

assert that the she-mule menstruates by the act of voiding her

urine, and that the mule owes the prematurity of his decay to his

habit of smelling at the urine. So much for the modes of generation in

connexion with these animals.

                                  25



    Breeders and trainers can distinguish between young and old

quadrupeds. If, when drawn back from the jaw, the skin at once goes

back to its place, the animal is young; if it remains long wrinkled

up, the animal is old.

                                  26



    The camel carries its young for ten months, and bears but one at

a time and never more; the young camel is removed from the mother when

a year old. The animal lives for a long period, more than fifty years.

It bears in spring-time, and gives milk until the time of the next

conception. Its flesh and milk are exceptionally palatable. The milk

is drunk mixed with water in the proportion of either two to one or

three to one.

                                  27



    The elephant of either sex is fitted for breeding before

reaching the age of twenty. The female carries her young, according to

some accounts, for two and a half years; according to others, for

three years; and the discrepancy in the assigned periods is due to the

fact that there are never human eyewitnesses to the commerce between

the sexes. The female settles down on its rear to cast its young,

and obviously suffers greatly during the process. The young one,

immediately after birth, sucks the mother, not with its trunk but with

the mouth; and can walk about and see distinctly the moment it is

born.

                                  28



    The wild sow submits to the boar at the beginning of winter, and

in the spring-time retreats for parturition to a lair in some district

inaccessible to intrusion, hemmed in with sheer cliffs and chasms

and overshadowed by trees. The boar usually remains by the sow for

thirty days. The number of the litter and the period gestation is

the same as in the case of the domesticated congener. The sound of the

grunt also is similar; only that the sow grunts continually, and the

boar but seldom. Of the wild boars such as are castrated grow to the

largest size and become fiercest: to which circumstance Homer

alludes when he says:-



    'He reared against him a wild castrated boar: it was not like a

food-devouring brute, but like a forest-clad promontory.'



    Wild boars become castrated owing to an itch befalling them in

early life in the region of the testicles, and the castration is

superinduced by their rubbing themselves against the trunks of trees.

                                  29



    The hind, as has been stated, submits to the stag as a rule only

under compulsion, as she is unable to endure the male often owing to

the rigidity of the penis. However, they do occasionally submit to the

stag as the ewe submits ram; and when they are in heat the hinds avoid

one another. The stag is not constant to one particular hind, but

after a while quits one and mates with others. The breeding time is

after the rising of Arcturus, during the months of Boedromion and

Maimacterion. The period of gestation lasts for eight months.

Conception comes on a few days after intercourse; and a number of

hinds can be impregnated by a single male. The hind, as a rule,

bears but one fawn, although instances have been known of her

casting two. Out of dread of wild beasts she casts her young by the

side of the high-road. The young fawn grows with rapidity.

Menstruation occurs at no other time with the hind; it takes place

only after parturition, and the substance is phlegm-like.

    The hind leads the fawn to her lair; this is her place of

refuge, a cave with a single inlet, inside which she shelters

herself against attack.

    Fabulous stories are told concerning the longevity of the

animal, but the stories have never been verified, and the brevity of

the period of gestation and the rapidity of growth in the fawn would

not lead one to attribute extreme longevity to this creature.

    In the mountain called Elaphoeis or Deer Mountain, which is in

Arginussa in Asia Minor-the place, by the way, where Alcibiades was

assassinated-all the hinds have the ear split, so that, if they

stray to a distance, they can be recognized by this mark; and the

embryo actually has the mark while yet in the womb of the mother.

    The hind has four teats like the cow. After the hinds have

become pregnant, the males all segregate one by one, and in

consequence of the violence of their sexual passions they keep each

one to himself, dig a hole in the ground, and bellow from time to

time; in all these particulars they resemble the goat, and their

foreheads from getting wetted become black, as is also the case with

the goat. In this way they pass the time until the rain falls, after

which time they turn to pasture. The animal acts in this way owing

to its sexual wantonness and also to its obesity; for in summer-time

it becomes so exceptionally fat as to be unable to run: in fact at

this period they can be overtaken by the hunters that pursue them on

foot in the second or third run; and, by the way, in consequence of

the heat of the weather and their getting out of breath they always

make for water in their runs. In the rutting season, the flesh of

the deer is unsavoury and rank, like the flesh of the he-goat. In

winter-time the deer becomes thin and weak, but towards the approach

of the spring he is at his best for running. When on the run the

deer keeps pausing from time to time, and waits until his pursuer

draws upon him, whereupon he starts off again. This habit appears

due to some internal pain: at all events, the gut is so slender and

weak that, if you strike the animal ever so softly, it is apt to break

asunder, though the hide of the animal remains sound and uninjured.

                                  30



    Bears, as has been previously stated, do not copulate with the

male mounting the back of the female, but with the female lying down

under the male. The she-bear goes with young for thirty days. She

brings forth sometimes one cub, sometimes two cubs, and at most

five. Of all animals the newly born cub of the she bear is the

smallest in proportion to the size of the mother; that is to say, it

is larger than a mouse but smaller than a weasel. It is also smooth

and blind, and its legs and most of its organs are as yet

inarticulate. Pairing takes Place in the month of Elaphebolion, and

parturition about the time for retiring into winter quarters; about

this time the bear and the she-bear are at the fattest. After the

she-bear has reared her young, she comes out of her winter lair in the

third month, when it is already spring. The female porcupine, by the

way, hibernates and goes with young the same number of days as the

she-bear, and in all respects as to parturition resembles this animal.

When a she-bear is with young, it is a very hard task to catch her.

                                  31



    It has already been stated that the lion and lioness copulate

rearwards, and that these animals are opisthuretic. They do not

copulate nor bring forth at all seasons indiscriminately, but once

in the year only. The lioness brings forth in the spring, generally

two cubs at a time, and six at the very most; but sometimes only

one. The story about the lioness discharging her womb in the act of

parturition is a pure fable, and was merely invented to account for

the scarcity of the animal; for the animal is, as is well known, a

rare animal, and is not found in many countries. In fact, in the whole

of Europe it is only found in the strip between the rivers Achelous

and Nessus. The cubs of the lioness when newly born are exceedingly

small, and can scarcely walk when two months old. The Syrian lion

bears cubs five times: five cubs at the first litter, then four,

then three, then two, and lastly one; after this the lioness ceases to

bear for the rest of her days. The lioness has no mane, but this

appendage is peculiar to the lion. The lion sheds only the four

so-called canines, two in the upper jaw and two in the lower; and it

sheds them when it is six months old.

                                   32



    The hyena in colour resembles the wolf, but is more shaggy,

and is furnished with a mane running all along the spine. What is

recounted concerning its genital organs, to the effect that every

hyena is furnished with the organ both of the male and the female,

is untrue. The fact is that the sexual organ of the male hyena

resembles the same organ in the wolf and in the dog; the part

resembling the female genital organ lies underneath the tail, and does

to some extent resemble the female organ, but it is unprovided with

duct or passage, and the passage for the residuum comes underneath it.

The female hyena has the part that resembles the organ of the male,

and, as in the case of the male, has it underneath her tail,

unprovided with duct or passage; and after it the passage for the

residuum, and underneath this the true female genital organ. The

female hyena has a womb, like all other female animals of the same

kind. It is an exceedingly rare circumstance to meet with a female

hyena. At least a hunter said that out of eleven hyenas he had caught,

only one was a female.

                                  33



    Hares copulate in a rearward posture, as has been stated, for

the animal is opisthuretic. They breed and bear at all seasons,

superfoetate during pregnancy, and bear young every month. They do not

give birth to their young ones all together at one time, but bring

them forth at intervals over as many days as the circumstances of each

case may require. The female is supplied with milk before parturition;

and after bearing submits immediately to the male, and is capable of

conception while suckling her young. The milk in consistency resembles

sow's milk. The young are born blind, as is the case with the

greater part Of the fissipeds or toed animals.

                                  34



    The fox mounts the vixen in copulation, and the vixen bears

young like the she-bear; in fact, her young ones are even more

inarticulately formed. Before parturition she retires to sequestered

places, so that it is a great rarity for a vixen to be caught while

pregnant. After parturition she warms her young and gets them into

shape by licking them. She bears four at most at a birth.

                                  35



    The wolf resembles the dog in regard to the time of conception and

parturition, the number of the litter, and the blindness of the

newborn young. The sexes couple at one special period, and the

female brings forth at the beginning of the summer. There is an

account given of the parturition of the she-wolf that borders on the

fabulous, to the effect that she confines her lying-in to within

twelve particular days of the year. And they give the reason for

this in the form of a myth, viz. that when they transported Leto in so

many days from the land of the Hyperboreans to the island of Delos,

she assumed the form of a she-wolf to escape the anger of Here.

Whether the account be correct or not has not yet been verified; I

give it merely as it is currently told. There is no more of truth in

the current statement that the she-wolf bears once and only once in

her lifetime.

    The cat and the ichneumon bear as many young as the dog, and

live on the same food; they live about six years. The cubs of the

panther are born blind like those of the wolf, and the female bears

four at the most at one birth. The particulars of conception are the

same for the thos, or civet, as for the dog; the cubs of the animal

are born blind, and the female bears two, or three, or four at a

birth. It is long in the body and low in stature; but not withstanding

the shortness of its legs it is exceptionally fleet of foot, owing

to the suppleness of its frame and its capacity for leaping.

                                  36



    There is found in Syria a so-called mule. It is not the same as

the cross between the horse and ass, but resembles it just as a wild

ass resembles the domesticated congener, and derives its name from the

resemblance. Like the wild ass, this wild mule is remarkable for its

speed. The animals of this species interbreed with one another; and

a proof of this statement may be gathered from the fact that a certain

number of them were brought into Phrygia in the time of Pharnaces, the

father of Pharnabazus, and the animal is there still. The number

originally introduced was nine, and there are three there at the

present day.

                                  37



    The phenomena of generation in regard to the mouse are the most

astonishing both for the number of the young and for the rapidity of

recurrence in the births. On one occasion a she-mouse in a state of

pregnancy was shut up by accident in a jar containing millet-seed, and

after a little while the lid of the jar was removed and upwards of one

hundred and twenty mice were found inside it.

    The rate of propagation of field mice in country places, and the

destruction that they cause, are beyond all telling. In many places

their number is so incalculable that but very little of the

corn-crop is left to the farmer; and so rapid is their mode of

proceeding that sometimes a small farmer will one day observe that

it is time for reaping, and on the following morning, when he takes

his reapers afield, he finds his entire crop devoured. Their

disappearance is unaccountable: in a few days not a mouse will there

be to be seen. And yet in the time before these few days men fail to

keep down their numbers by fumigating and unearthing them, or by

regularly hunting them and turning in swine upon them; for pigs, by

the way, turn up the mouse-holes by rooting with their snouts. Foxes

also hunt them, and the wild ferrets in particular destroy them, but

they make no way against the prolific qualities of the animal and

the rapidity of its breeding. When they are super-abundant, nothing

succeeds in thinning them down except the rain; but after heavy

rains they disappear rapidly.

    In a certain district of Persia when a female mouse is dissected

the female embryos appear to be pregnant. Some people assert, and

positively assert, that a female mouse by licking salt can become

pregnant without the intervention of the male.

    Mice in Egypt are covered with bristles like the hedgehog. There

is also a different breed of mice that walk on their two hind-legs;

their front legs are small and their hind-legs long; the breed is

exceedingly numerous. There are many other breeds of mice than are

here referred to.

