




                               HISTORY OF ANIMALS

                                  by Aristotle



                    translated by D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson




                                 Book I



                                   1



    OF the parts of animals some are simple: to wit, all such as

divide into parts uniform with themselves, as flesh into flesh; others

are composite, such as divide into parts not uniform with

themselves, as, for instance, the hand does not divide into hands

nor the face into faces.

    And of such as these, some are called not parts merely, but limbs

or members. Such are those parts that, while entire in themselves,

have within themselves other diverse parts: as for instance, the head,

foot, hand, the arm as a whole, the chest; for these are all in

themselves entire parts, and there are other diverse parts belonging

to them.

    All those parts that do not subdivide into parts uniform with

themselves are composed of parts that do so subdivide, for instance,

hand is composed of flesh, sinews, and bones. Of animals, some

resemble one another in all their parts, while others have parts

wherein they differ. Sometimes the parts are identical in form or

species, as, for instance, one man's nose or eye resembles another

man's nose or eye, flesh flesh, and bone bone; and in like manner with

a horse, and with all other animals which we reckon to be of one and

the same species: for as the whole is to the whole, so each to each

are the parts severally. In other cases the parts are identical,

save only for a difference in the way of excess or defect, as is the

case in such animals as are of one and the same genus. By 'genus' I

mean, for instance, Bird or Fish, for each of these is subject to

difference in respect of its genus, and there are many species of

fishes and of birds.

    Within the limits of genera, most of the parts as a rule

exhibit differences through contrast of the property or accident, such

as colour and shape, to which they are subject: in that some are

more and some in a less degree the subject of the same property or

accident; and also in the way of multitude or fewness, magnitude or

parvitude, in short in the way of excess or defect. Thus in some the

texture of the flesh is soft, in others firm; some have a long bill,

others a short one; some have abundance of feathers, others have

only a small quantity. It happens further that some have parts that

others have not: for instance, some have spurs and others not, some

have crests and others not; but as a general rule, most parts and

those that go to make up the bulk of the body are either identical

with one another, or differ from one another in the way of contrast

and of excess and defect. For 'the more' and 'the less' may be

represented as 'excess' or 'defect'.

    Once again, we may have to do with animals whose parts are

neither identical in form nor yet identical save for differences in

the way of excess or defect: but they are the same only in the way

of analogy, as, for instance, bone is only analogous to fish-bone,

nail to hoof, hand to claw, and scale to feather; for what the feather

is in a bird, the scale is in a fish.

    The parts, then, which animals severally possess are diverse

from, or identical with, one another in the fashion above described.

And they are so furthermore in the way of local disposition: for

many animals have identical organs that differ in position; for

instance, some have teats in the breast, others close to the thighs.

    Of the substances that are composed of parts uniform (or

homogeneous) with themselves, some are soft and moist, others are

dry and solid. The soft and moist are such either absolutely or so

long as they are in their natural conditions, as, for instance, blood,

serum, lard, suet, marrow, sperm, gall, milk in such as have it

flesh and the like; and also, in a different way, the superfluities,

as phlegm and the excretions of the belly and the bladder. The dry and

solid are such as sinew, skin, vein, hair, bone, gristle, nail, horn

(a term which as applied to the part involves an ambiguity, since

the whole also by virtue of its form is designated horn), and such

parts as present an analogy to these.

    Animals differ from one another in their modes of subsistence,

in their actions, in their habits, and in their parts. Concerning

these differences we shall first speak in broad and general terms, and

subsequently we shall treat of the same with close reference to each

particular genus.

    Differences are manifested in modes of subsistence, in habits, in

actions performed. For instance, some animals live in water and others

on land. And of those that live in water some do so in one way, and

some in another: that is to say, some live and feed in the water, take

in and emit water, and cannot live if deprived of water, as is the

case with the great majority of fishes; others get their food and

spend their days in the water, but do not take in water but air, nor

do they bring forth in the water. Many of these creatures are

furnished with feet, as the otter, the beaver, and the crocodile; some

are furnished with wings, as the diver and the grebe; some are

destitute of feet, as the water-snake. Some creatures get their living

in the water and cannot exist outside it: but for all that do not take

in either air or water, as, for instance, the sea-nettle and the

oyster. And of creatures that live in the water some live in the

sea, some in rivers, some in lakes, and some in marshes, as the frog

and the newt.

    Of animals that live on dry land some take in air and emit it,

which phenomena are termed 'inhalation' and 'exhalation'; as, for

instance, man and all such land animals as are furnished with lungs.

Others, again, do not inhale air, yet live and find their sustenance

on dry land; as, for instance, the wasp, the bee, and all other

insects. And by 'insects' I mean such creatures as have nicks or

notches on their bodies, either on their bellies or on both backs

and bellies.

    And of land animals many, as has been said, derive their

subsistence from the water; but of creatures that live in and inhale

water not a single one derives its subsistence from dry land.

    Some animals at first live in water, and by and by change their

shape and live out of water, as is the case with river worms, for

out of these the gadfly develops.

    Furthermore, some animals are stationary, and some are erratic.

Stationary animals are found in water, but no such creature is found

on dry land. In the water are many creatures that live in close

adhesion to an external object, as is the case with several kinds of

oyster. And, by the way, the sponge appears to be endowed with a

certain sensibility: as a proof of which it is alleged that the

difficulty in detaching it from its moorings is increased if the

movement to detach it be not covertly applied.

    Other creatures adhere at one time to an object and detach

themselves from it at other times, as is the case with a species of

the so-called sea-nettle; for some of these creatures seek their

food in the night-time loose and unattached.

    Many creatures are unattached but motionless, as is the case with

oysters and the so-called holothuria. Some can swim, as, for instance,

fishes, molluscs, and crustaceans, such as the crawfish. But some of

these last move by walking, as the crab, for it is the nature of the

creature, though it lives in water, to move by walking.

    Of land animals some are furnished with wings, such as birds

and bees, and these are so furnished in different ways one from

another; others are furnished with feet. Of the animals that are

furnished with feet some walk, some creep, and some wriggle. But no

creature is able only to move by flying, as the fish is able only to

swim, for the animals with leathern wings can walk; the bat has feet

and the seal has imperfect feet.

    Some birds have feet of little power, and are therefore called

Apodes. This little bird is powerful on the wing; and, as a rule,

birds that resemble it are weak-footed and strong winged, such as

the swallow and the drepanis or (?) Alpine swift; for all these

birds resemble one another in their habits and in their plumage, and

may easily be mistaken one for another. (The apus is to be seen at all

seasons, but the drepanis only after rainy weather in summer; for this

is the time when it is seen and captured, though, as a general rule,

it is a rare bird.)

    Again, some animals move by walking on the ground as well as by

swimming in water.

    Furthermore, the following differences are manifest in their

modes of living and in their actions. Some are gregarious, some are

solitary, whether they be furnished with feet or wings or be fitted

for a life in the water; and some partake of both characters, the

solitary and the gregarious. And of the gregarious, some are

disposed to combine for social purposes, others to live each for its

own self.

    Gregarious creatures are, among birds, such as the pigeon, the

crane, and the swan; and, by the way, no bird furnished with crooked

talons is gregarious. Of creatures that live in water many kinds of

fishes are gregarious, such as the so-called migrants, the tunny,

the pelamys, and the bonito.

    Man, by the way, presents a mixture of the two characters, the

gregarious and the solitary.

    Social creatures are such as have some one common object in view;

and this property is not common to all creatures that are

gregarious. Such social creatures are man, the bee, the wasp, the ant,

and the crane.

    Again, of these social creatures some submit to a ruler, others

are subject to no governance: as, for instance, the crane and the

several sorts of bee submit to a ruler, whereas ants and numerous

other creatures are every one his own master.

    And again, both of gregarious and of solitary animals, some are

attached to a fixed home and others are erratic or nomad.

    Also, some are carnivorous, some graminivorous, some omnivorous:

whilst some feed on a peculiar diet, as for instance the bees and

the spiders, for the bee lives on honey and certain other sweets,

and the spider lives by catching flies; and some creatures live on

fish. Again, some creatures catch their food, others treasure it up;

whereas others do not so.

    Some creatures provide themselves with a dwelling, others go

without one: of the former kind are the mole, the mouse, the ant,

the bee; of the latter kind are many insects and quadrupeds.

Further, in respect to locality of dwelling place, some creatures

dwell under ground, as the lizard and the snake; others live on the

surface of the ground, as the horse and the dog. make to themselves

holes, others do not

    Some are nocturnal, as the owl and the bat; others live in the

daylight.

    Moreover, some creatures are tame and some are wild: some are

at all times tame, as man and the mule; others are at all times

savage, as the leopard and the wolf; and some creatures can be rapidly

tamed, as the elephant.

    Again, we may regard animals in another light. For, whenever a

race of animals is found domesticated, the same is always to be

found in a wild condition; as we find to be the case with horses,

kine, swine, (men), sheep, goats, and dogs.

    Further, some animals emit sound while others are mute, and

some are endowed with voice: of these latter some have articulate

speech, while others are inarticulate; some are given to continual

chirping and twittering some are prone to silence; some are musical,

and some unmusical; but all animals without exception exercise their

power of singing or chattering chiefly in connexion with the

intercourse of the sexes.

    Again, some creatures live in the fields, as the cushat; some

on the mountains, as the hoopoe; some frequent the abodes of men, as

the pigeon.

    Some, again, are peculiarly salacious, as the partridge, the

barn-door cock and their congeners; others are inclined to chastity,

as the whole tribe of crows, for birds of this kind indulge but rarely

in sexual intercourse.

     Of marine animals, again, some live in the open seas, some near

the shore, some on rocks.

    Furthermore, some are combative under offence; others are

provident for defence. Of the former kind are such as act as

aggressors upon others or retaliate when subjected to ill usage, and

of the latter kind are such as merely have some means of guarding

themselves against attack.

    Animals also differ from one another in regard to character in

the following respects. Some are good-tempered, sluggish, and little

prone to ferocity, as the ox; others are quick tempered, ferocious and

unteachable, as the wild boar; some are intelligent and timid, as

the stag and the hare; others are mean and treacherous, as the

snake; others are noble and courageous and high-bred, as the lion;

others are thorough-bred and wild and treacherous, as the wolf: for,

by the way, an animal is highbred if it come from a noble stock, and

an animal is thorough-bred if it does not deflect from its racial

characteristics.

    Further, some are crafty and mischievous, as the fox; some are

spirited and affectionate and fawning, as the dog; others are

easy-tempered and easily domesticated, as the elephant; others are

cautious and watchful, as the goose; others are jealous and

self-conceited, as the peacock. But of all animals man alone is

capable of deliberation.

    Many animals have memory, and are capable of instruction; but no

other creature except man can recall the past at will.

    With regard to the several genera of animals, particulars as to

their habits of life and modes of existence will be discussed more

fully by and by.






                                   2



    Common to all animals are the organs whereby they take food and

the organs where into they take it; and these are either identical

with one another, or are diverse in the ways above specified: to

wit, either identical in form, or varying in respect of excess or

defect, or resembling one another analogically, or differing in

position.

    Furthermore, the great majority of animals have other organs

besides these in common, whereby they discharge the residuum of

their food: I say, the great majority, for this statement does not

apply to all. And, by the way, the organ whereby food is taken in is

called the mouth, and the organ whereinto it is taken, the belly;

the remainder of the alimentary system has a great variety of names.

    Now the residuum of food is twofold in kind, wet and dry, and

such creatures as have organs receptive of wet residuum are invariably

found with organs receptive of dry residuum; but such as have organs

receptive of dry residuum need not possess organs receptive of wet

residuum. In other words, an animal has a bowel or intestine if it

have a bladder; but an animal may have a bowel and be without a

bladder. And, by the way, I may here remark that the organ receptive

of wet residuum is termed 'bladder', and the organ receptive of dry

residuum 'intestine or 'bowel'.






                                   3



    Of animals otherwise, a great many have, besides the organs

above-mentioned, an organ for excretion of the sperm: and of animals

capable of generation one secretes into another, and the other into

itself. The latter is termed 'female', and the former 'male'; but some

animals have neither male nor female. Consequently, the organs

connected with this function differ in form, for some animals have a

womb and others an organ analogous thereto.

   The above-mentioned organs, then, are the most indispensable parts

of animals; and with some of them all animals without exception, and

with others animals for the most part, must needs be provided.

    One sense, and one alone, is common to all animals-the sense of

touch. Consequently, there is no special name for the organ in which

it has its seat; for in some groups of animals the organ is identical,

in others it is only analogous.






                                   4



    Every animal is supplied with moisture, and, if the animal be

deprived of the same by natural causes or artificial means, death

ensues: further, every animal has another part in which the moisture

is contained. These parts are blood and vein, and in other animals

there is something to correspond; but in these latter the parts are

imperfect, being merely fibre and serum or lymph.

    Touch has its seat in a part uniform and homogeneous, as in the

flesh or something of the kind, and generally, with animals supplied

with blood, in the parts charged with blood. In other animals it has

its seat in parts analogous to the parts charged with blood; but in

all cases it is seated in parts that in their texture are homogeneous.

    The active faculties, on the contrary, are seated in the parts

that are heterogeneous: as, for instance, the business of preparing

the food is seated in the mouth, and the office of locomotion in the

feet, the wings, or in organs to correspond.

    Again, some animals are supplied with blood, as man, the horse,

and all such animals as are, when full-grown, either destitute of

feet, or two-footed, or four-footed; other animals are bloodless, such

as the bee and the wasp, and, of marine animals, the cuttle-fish,

the crawfish, and all such animals as have more than four feet.






                                   5



    Again, some animals are viviparous, others oviparous, others

vermiparous or 'grub-bearing'. Some are viviparous, such as man, the

horse, the seal, and all other animals that are hair-coated, and, of

marine animals, the cetaceans, as the dolphin, and the so-called

Selachia. (Of these latter animals, some have a tubular air-passage

and no gills, as the dolphin and the whale: the dolphin with the

air-passage going through its back, the whale with the air-passage

in its forehead; others have uncovered gills, as the Selachia, the

sharks and rays.)

    What we term an egg is a certain completed result of conception

out of which the animal that is to be develops, and in such a way that

in respect to its primitive germ it comes from part only of the egg,

while the rest serves for food as the germ develops. A 'grub' on the

other hand is a thing out of which in its entirety the animal in its

entirety develops, by differentiation and growth of the embryo.

    Of viviparous animals, some hatch eggs in their own interior,

as creatures of the shark kind; others engender in their interior a

live foetus, as man and the horse. When the result of conception is

perfected, with some animals a living creature is brought forth,

with others an egg is brought to light, with others a grub. Of the

eggs, some have egg-shells and are of two different colours within,

such as birds' eggs; others are soft-skinned and of uniform colour, as

the eggs of animals of the shark kind. Of the grubs, some are from the

first capable of movement, others are motionless. However, with regard

to these phenomena we shall speak precisely hereafter when we come

to treat of Generation.

    Furthermore, some animals have feet and some are destitute

thereof. Of such as have feet some animals have two, as is the case

with men and birds, and with men and birds only; some have four, as

the lizard and the dog; some have more, as the centipede and the

bee; but allsoever that have feet have an even number of them.

    Of swimming creatures that are destitute of feet, some have

winglets or fins, as fishes: and of these some have four fins, two

above on the back, two below on the belly, as the gilthead and the

basse; some have two only,-to wit, such as are exceedingly long and

smooth, as the eel and the conger; some have none at all, as the

muraena, but use the sea just as snakes use dry ground-and by the way,

snakes swim in water in just the same way. Of the shark-kind some have

no fins, such as those that are flat and long-tailed, as the ray and

the sting-ray, but these fishes swim actually by the undulatory motion

of their flat bodies; the fishing frog, however, has fins, and so

likewise have all such fishes as have not their flat surfaces

thinned off to a sharp edge.

    Of those swimming creatures that appear to have feet, as is the

case with the molluscs, these creatures swim by the aid of their

feet and their fins as well, and they swim most rapidly backwards in

the direction of the trunk, as is the case with the cuttle-fish or

sepia and the calamary; and, by the way, neither of these latter can

walk as the poulpe or octopus can.

    The hard-skinned or crustaceous animals, like the crawfish,

swim by the instrumentality of their tail-parts; and they swim most

rapidly tail foremost, by the aid of the fins developed upon that

member. The newt swims by means of its feet and tail; and its tail

resembles that of the sheatfish, to compare little with great.

    Of animals that can fly some are furnished with feathered wings,

as the eagle and the hawk; some are furnished with membranous wings,

as the bee and the cockchafer; others are furnished with leathern

wings, as the flying fox and the bat. All flying creatures possessed

of blood have feathered wings or leathern wings; the bloodless

creatures have membranous wings, as insects. The creatures that have

feathered wings or leathern wings have either two feet or no feet at

all: for there are said to be certain flying serpents in Ethiopia that

are destitute of feet.

    Creatures that have feathered wings are classed as a genus

under the name of 'bird'; the other two genera, the leathern-winged

and membrane-winged, are as yet without a generic title.

    Of creatures that can fly and are bloodless some are coleopterous

or sheath-winged, for they have their wings in a sheath or shard, like

the cockchafer and the dung-beetle; others are sheathless, and of

these latter some are dipterous and some tetrapterous: tetrapterous,

such as are comparatively large or have their stings in the tail,

dipterous, such as are comparatively small or have their stings in

front. The coleoptera are, without exception, devoid of stings; the

diptera have the sting in front, as the fly, the horsefly, the gadfly,

and the gnat.

    Bloodless animals as a general rule are inferior in point of size

to blooded animals; though, by the way, there are found in the sea

some few bloodless creatures of abnormal size, as in the case of

certain molluscs. And of these bloodless genera, those are the largest

that dwell in milder climates, and those that inhabit the sea are

larger than those living on dry land or in fresh water.

    All creatures that are capable of motion move with four or more

points of motion; the blooded animals with four only: as, for

instance, man with two hands and two feet, birds with two wings and

two feet, quadrupeds and fishes severally with four feet and four

fins. Creatures that have two winglets or fins, or that have none at

all like serpents, move all the same with not less than four points of

motion; for there are four bends in their bodies as they move, or

two bends together with their fins. Bloodless and many footed animals,

whether furnished with wings or feet, move with more than four

points of motion; as, for instance, the dayfly moves with four feet

and four wings: and, I may observe in passing, this creature is

exceptional not only in regard to the duration of its existence,

whence it receives its name, but also because though a quadruped it

has wings also.

    All animals move alike, four-footed and many-footed; in other

words, they all move cross-corner-wise. And animals in general have

two feet in advance; the crab alone has four.






                                   6



    Very extensive genera of animals, into which other subdivisions

fall, are the following: one, of birds; one, of fishes; and another,

of cetaceans. Now all these creatures are blooded.

    There is another genus of the hard-shell kind, which is called

oyster; another of the soft-shell kind, not as yet designated by a

single term, such as the spiny crawfish and the various kinds of crabs

and lobsters; and another of molluscs, as the two kinds of calamary

and the cuttle-fish; that of insects is different. All these latter

creatures are bloodless, and such of them as have feet have a goodly

number of them; and of the insects some have wings as well as feet.

    Of the other animals the genera are not extensive. For in them

one species does not comprehend many species; but in one case, as man,

the species is simple, admitting of no differentiation, while other

cases admit of differentiation, but the forms lack particular

designations.

    So, for instance, creatures that are qudapedal and unprovided

with wings are blooded without exception, but some of them are

viviparous, and some oviparous. Such as are viviparous are

hair-coated, and such as are oviparous are covered with a kind of

tessellated hard substance; and the tessellated bits of this substance

are, as it were, similar in regard to position to a scale.

    An animal that is blooded and capable of movement on dry land,

but is naturally unprovided with feet, belongs to the serpent genus;

and animals of this genus are coated with the tessellated horny

substance. Serpents in general are oviparous; the adder, an

exceptional case, is viviparous: for not all viviparous animals are

hair-coated, and some fishes also are viviparous.

    All animals, however, that are hair-coated are viviparous. For,

by the way, one must regard as a kind of hair such prickly hairs as

hedgehogs and porcupines carry; for these spines perform the office of

hair, and not of feet as is the case with similar parts of

sea-urchins.

    In the genus that combines all viviparous quadrupeds are many

species, but under no common appellation. They are only named as it

were one by one, as we say man, lion, stag, horse, dog, and so on;

though, by the way, there is a sort of genus that embraces all

creatures that have bushy manes and bushy tails, such as the horse,

the ass, the mule, the jennet, and the animals that are called Hemioni

in Syria,-from their externally resembling mules, though they are

not strictly of the same species. And that they are not so is proved

by the fact that they mate with and breed from one another.  For all

these reasons, we must take animals species by species, and discuss

their peculiarities severally'

    These preceding statements, then, have been put forward thus in a

general way, as a kind of foretaste of the number of subjects and of

the properties that we have to consider in order that we may first get

a clear notion of distinctive character and common properties. By

and by we shall discuss these matters with greater minuteness.

    After this we shall pass on to the discussion of causes. For to do

this when the investigation of the details is complete is the proper

and natural method, and that whereby the subjects and the premisses of

our argument will afterwards be rendered plain.

    In the first place we must look to the constituent parts of

animals. For it is in a way relative to these parts, first and

foremost, that animals in their entirety differ from one another:

either in the fact that some have this or that, while they have not

that or this; or by peculiarities of position or of arrangement; or by

the differences that have been previously mentioned, depending upon

diversity of form, or excess or defect in this or that particular,

on analogy, or on contrasts of the accidental qualities.

    To begin with, we must take into consideration the parts of

Man. For, just as each nation is wont to reckon by that monetary

standard with which it is most familiar, so must we do in other

matters. And, of course, man is the animal with which we are all of us

the most familiar.

    Now the parts are obvious enough to physical perception. However,

with the view of observing due order and sequence and of combining

rational notions with physical perception, we shall proceed to

enumerate the parts: firstly, the organic, and afterwards the simple

or non-composite.






                                   7



    The chief parts into which the body as a whole is subdivided,

are the head, the neck, the trunk (extending from the neck to the

privy parts), which is called the thorax, two arms and two legs.

    Of the parts of which the head is composed the hair-covered

portion is called the 'skull'. The front portion of it is termed

'bregma' or 'sinciput', developed after birth-for it is the last of

all the bones in the body to acquire solidity,-the hinder part is

termed the 'occiput', and the part intervening between the sinciput

and the occiput is the 'crown'. The brain lies underneath the

sinciput; the occiput is hollow. The skull consists entirely of thin

bone, rounded in shape, and contained within a wrapper of fleshless

skin.

    The skull has sutures: one, of circular form, in the case of

women; in the case of men, as a general rule, three meeting at a

point. Instances have been known of a man's skull devoid of suture

altogether. In the skull the middle line, where the hair parts, is

called the crown or vertex. In some cases the parting is double;

that is to say, some men are double crowned, not in regard to the bony

skull, but in consequence of the double fall or set of the hair.






                                   8



    The part that lies under the skull is called the 'face': but in

the case of man only, for the term is not applied to a fish or to an

ox. In the face the part below the sinciput and between the eyes is

termed the forehead. When men have large foreheads, they are slow to

move; when they have small ones, they are fickle; when they have broad

ones, they are apt to be distraught; when they have foreheads

rounded or bulging out, they are quick-tempered.






                                   9



    Underneath the forehead are two eyebrows. Straight eyebrows are

a sign of softness of disposition; such as curve in towards the

nose, of harshness; such as curve out towards the temples, of humour

and dissimulation; such as are drawn in towards one another, of

jealousy.

    Under the eyebrows come the eyes. These are naturally two in

number. Each of them has an upper and a lower eyelid, and the hairs on

the edges of these are termed 'eyelashes'. The central part of the eye

includes the moist part whereby vision is effected, termed the

'pupil', and the part surrounding it called the 'black'; the part

outside this is the 'white'. A part common to the upper and lower

eyelid is a pair of nicks or corners, one in the direction of the

nose, and the other in the direction of the temples. When these are

long they are a sign of bad disposition; if the side toward the

nostril be fleshy and comb-like, they are a sign of dishonesty.

    All animals, as a general rule, are provided with eyes, excepting

the ostracoderms and other imperfect creatures; at all events, all

viviparous animals have eyes, with the exception of the mole. And

yet one might assert that, though the mole has not eyes in the full

sense, yet it has eyes in a kind of a way. For in point of absolute

fact it cannot see, and has no eyes visible externally; but when the

outer skin is removed, it is found to have the place where eyes are

usually situated, and the black parts of the eyes rightly situated,

and all the place that is usually devoted on the outside to eyes:

showing that the parts are stunted in development, and the skin

allowed to grow over.






                                  10



    Of the eye the white is pretty much the same in all creatures; but

what is called the black differs in various animals. Some have the rim

black, some distinctly blue, some greyish-blue, some greenish; and

this last colour is the sign of an excellent disposition, and is

particularly well adapted for sharpness of vision. Man is the only, or

nearly the only, creature, that has eyes of diverse colours.

Animals, as a rule, have eyes of one colour only. Some horses have

blue eyes.

    Of eyes, some are large, some small, some medium-sized; of these,

the medium-sized are the best. Moreover, eyes sometimes protrude,

sometimes recede, sometimes are neither protruding nor receding. Of

these, the receding eye is in all animals the most acute; but the last

kind are the sign of the best disposition. Again, eyes are sometimes

inclined to wink under observation, sometimes to remain open and

staring, and sometimes are disposed neither to wink nor stare. The

last kind are the sign of the best nature, and of the others, the

latter kind indicates impudence, and the former indecision.






                                  11



    Furthermore, there is a portion of the head, whereby an animal

hears, a part incapable of breathing, the 'ear'. I say 'incapable of

breathing', for Alcmaeon is mistaken when he says that goats inspire

through their ears. Of the ear one part is unnamed, the other part

is called the 'lobe'; and it is entirely composed of gristle and

flesh. The ear is constructed internally like the trumpet-shell, and

the innermost bone is like the ear itself, and into it at the end

the sound makes its way, as into the bottom of a jar. This

receptacle does not communicate by any passage with the brain, but

does so with the palate, and a vein extends from the brain towards it.

The eyes also are connected with the brain, and each of them lies at

the end of a little vein. Of animals possessed of ears man is the only

one that cannot move this organ. Of creatures possessed of hearing,

some have ears, whilst others have none, but merely have the

passages for ears visible, as, for example, feathered animals or

animals coated with horny tessellates.

    Viviparous animals, with the exception of the seal, the dolphin,

and those others which after a similar fashion to these are cetaceans,

are all provided with ears; for, by the way, the shark-kind are also

viviparous. Now, the seal has the passages visible whereby it hears;

but the dolphin can hear, but has no ears, nor yet any passages

visible. But man alone is unable to move his ears, and all other

animals can move them. And the ears lie, with man, in the same

horizontal plane with the eyes, and not in a plane above them as is

the case with some quadrupeds. Of ears, some are fine, some are

coarse, and some are of medium texture; the last kind are best for

hearing, but they serve in no way to indicate character. Some ears are

large, some small, some medium-sized; again, some stand out far,

some lie in close and tight, and some take up a medium position; of

these such as are of medium size and of medium position are

indications of the best disposition, while the large and outstanding

ones indicate a tendency to irrelevant talk or chattering. The part

intercepted between the eye, the ear, and the crown is termed the

'temple'. Again, there is a part of the countenance that serves as a

passage for the breath, the 'nose'. For a man inhales and exhales by

this organ, and sneezing is effected by its means: which last is an

outward rush of collected breath, and is the only mode of breath

used as an omen and regarded as supernatural. Both inhalation and

exhalation go right on from the nose towards the chest; and with the

nostrils alone and separately it is impossible to inhale or exhale,

owing to the fact that the inspiration and respiration take place from

the chest along the windpipe, and not by any portion connected with

the head; and indeed it is possible for a creature to live without

using this process of nasal respiration.

    Again, smelling takes place by means of the nose,-smelling, or the

sensible discrimination of odour. And the nostril admits of easy

motion, and is not, like the ear, intrinsically immovable. A part of

it, composed of gristle, constitutes, a septum or partition, and

part is an open passage; for the nostril consists of two separate

channels. The nostril (or nose) of the elephant is long and strong,

and the animal uses it like a hand; for by means of this organ it

draws objects towards it, and takes hold of them, and introduces its

food into its mouth, whether liquid or dry food, and it is the only

living creature that does so.

     Furthermore, there are two jaws; the front part of them

constitutes the chin, and the hinder part the cheek. All animals

move the lower jaw, with the exception of the river crocodile; this

creature moves the upper jaw only.

    Next after the nose come two lips, composed of flesh, and

facile of motion. The mouth lies inside the jaws and lips. Parts of

the mouth are the roof or palate and the pharynx.

    The part that is sensible of taste is the tongue. The sensation

has its seat at the tip of the tongue; if the object to be tasted be

placed on the flat surface of the organ, the taste is less sensibly

experienced. The tongue is sensitive in all other ways wherein flesh

in general is so: that is, it can appreciate hardness, or warmth and

cold, in any part of it, just as it can appreciate taste. The tongue

is sometimes broad, sometimes narrow, and sometimes of medium width;

the last kind is the best and the clearest in its discrimination of

taste. Moreover, the tongue is sometimes loosely hung, and sometimes

fastened: as in the case of those who mumble and who lisp.

     The tongue consists of flesh, soft and spongy, and the so-called

'epiglottis' is a part of this organ.

     That part of the mouth that splits into two bits is called the

'tonsils'; that part that splits into many bits, the 'gums'. Both

the tonsils and the gums are composed of flesh. In the gums are teeth,

composed of bone.

    Inside the mouth is another part, shaped like a bunch of

grapes, a pillar streaked with veins. If this pillar gets relaxed

and inflamed it is called 'uvula' or 'bunch of grapes', and it then

has a tendency to bring about suffocation.






                                  12



    The neck is the part between the face and the trunk. Of this the

front part is the larynx land the back part the ur The front part,

composed of gristle, through which respiration and speech is effected,

is termed the 'windpipe'; the part that is fleshy is the oesophagus,

inside just in front of the chine. The part to the back of the neck is

the epomis, or 'shoulder-point'.

    These then are the parts to be met with before you come to the

thorax.

    To the trunk there is a front part and a back part. Next after

the neck in the front part is the chest, with a pair of breasts. To

each of the breasts is attached a teat or nipple, through which in the

case of females the milk percolates; and the breast is of a spongy

texture. Milk, by the way, is found at times in the male; but with the

male the flesh of the breast is tough, with the female it is soft

and porous.






                                  13



    Next after the thorax and in front comes the 'belly', and its root

the 'navel'. Underneath this root the bilateral part is the 'flank':

the undivided part below the navel, the 'abdomen', the extremity of

which is the region of the 'pubes'; above the navel the

'hypochondrium'; the cavity common to the hypochondrium and the

flank is the gut-cavity.

    Serving as a brace girdle to the hinder parts is the pelvis,

and hence it gets its name (osphus), for it is symmetrical

(isophues) in appearance; of the fundament the part for resting on

is termed the 'rump', and the part whereon the thigh pivots is

termed the 'socket' (or acetabulum).

    The 'womb' is a part peculiar to the female; and the 'penis' is

peculiar to the male. This latter organ is external and situated at

the extremity of the trunk; it is composed of two separate parts: of

which the extreme part is fleshy, does not alter in size, and is

called the glans; and round about it is a skin devoid of any

specific title, which integument if it be cut asunder never grows

together again, any more than does the jaw or the eyelid. And the

connexion between the latter and the glans is called the frenum. The

remaining part of the penis is composed of gristle; it is easily

susceptible of enlargement; and it protrudes and recedes in the

reverse directions to what is observable in the identical organ in

cats. Underneath the penis are two 'testicles', and the integument

of these is a skin that is termed the 'scrotum'.

     Testicles are not identical with flesh, and are not altogether

diverse from it. But by and by we shall treat in an exhaustive way

regarding all such parts.






                                  14



    The privy part of the female is in character opposite to that of

the male. In other words, the part under the pubes is hollow or

receding, and not, like the male organ, protruding. Further, there

is an 'urethra' outside the womb; which organ serves as a passage

for the sperm of the male, and as an outlet for liquid excretion to

both sexes).

    The part common to the neck and chest is the 'throat'; the

'armpit' is common to side, arm, and shoulder; and the 'groin' is

common to thigh and abdomen. The part inside the thigh and buttocks is

the 'perineum', and the part outside the thigh and buttocks is the

'hypoglutis'.

    The front parts of the trunk have now been enumerated.

    The part behind the chest is termed the 'back'.






                                  15



   Parts of the back are a pair of 'shoulderblades', the

'back-bone', and, underneath on a level with the belly in the trunk,

the 'loins'. Common to the upper and lower part of the trunk are the

'ribs', eight on either side, for as to the so-called seven-ribbed

Ligyans we have not received any trustworthy evidence.

    Man, then, has an upper and a lower part, a front and a back

part, a right and a left side. Now the right and the left side are

pretty well alike in their parts and identical throughout, except that

the left side is the weaker of the two; but the back parts do not

resemble the front ones, neither do the lower ones the upper: only

that these upper and lower parts may be said to resemble one another

thus far, that, if the face be plump or meagre, the abdomen is plump

or meagre to correspond; and that the legs correspond to the arms, and

where the upper arm is short the thigh is usually short also, and

where the feet are small the hands are small correspondingly.

    Of the limbs, one set, forming a pair, is 'arms'. To the arm

belong the 'shoulder', 'upper-arm', 'elbow', 'fore-arm', and 'hand'.

To the hand belong the 'palm', and the five 'fingers'. The part of the

finger that bends is termed 'knuckle', the part that is inflexible

is termed the 'phalanx'. The big finger or thumb is single-jointed,

the other fingers are double jointed. The bending both of the arm

and of the finger takes place from without inwards in all cases; and

the arm bends at the elbow. The inner part of the hand is termed the

palm', and is fleshy and divided by joints or lines: in the case of

long-lived people by one or two extending right across, in the case of

the short-lived by two, not so extending. The joint between hand and

arm is termed the 'wrist'. The outside or back of the hand is

sinewy, and has no specific designation.

    There is another duplicate limb, the 'leg'. Of this limb the

double-knobbed part is termed the 'thigh-bone', the sliding part of

the 'kneecap', the double-boned part the 'leg'; the front part of this

latter is termed the 'shin', and the part behind it the 'calf',

wherein the flesh is sinewy and venous, in some cases drawn upwards

towards the hollow behind the knee, as in the case of people with

large hips, and in other cases drawn downwards. The lower extremity of

the shin is the 'ankle', duplicate in either leg. The part of the limb

that contains a multiplicity of bones is the 'foot'. The hinder part

of the foot is the 'heel'; at the front of it the divided part

consists of 'toes', five in number; the fleshy part underneath is

the 'ball'; the upper part or back of the foot is sinewy and has no

particular appellation; of the toe, one portion is the 'nail' and

another the 'joint', and the nail is in all cases at the extremity;

and toes are without exception single jointed. Men that have the

inside or sole of the foot clumsy and not arched, that is, that walk

resting on the entire under-surface of their feet, are prone to

roguery. The joint common to thigh and shin is the 'knee'.

    These, then, are the parts common to the male and the female sex.

The relative position of the parts as to up and down, or to front

and back, or to right and left, all this as regards externals might

safely be left to mere ordinary perception. But for all that, we

must treat of them for the same reason as the one previously brought

forward; that is to say, we must refer to them in order that a due and

regular sequence may be observed in our exposition, and in order

that by the enumeration of these obvious facts due attention may be

subsequently given to those parts in men and other animals that are

diverse in any way from one another.

    In man, above all other animals, the terms 'upper' and 'lower'

are used in harmony with their natural positions; for in him, upper

and lower have the same meaning as when they are applied to the

universe as a whole. In like manner the terms, 'in front', 'behind',

'right' and 'left', are used in accordance with their natural sense.

But in regard to other animals, in some cases these distinctions do

not exist, and in others they do so, but in a vague way. For instance,

the head with all animals is up and above in respect to their

bodies; but man alone, as has been said, has, in maturity, this part

uppermost in respect to the material universe.

    Next after the head comes the neck, and then the chest and the

back: the one in front and the other behind. Next after these come the

belly, the loins, the sexual parts, and the haunches; then the thigh

and shin; and, lastly, the feet.

    The legs bend frontwards, in the direction of actual progression,

and frontwards also lies that part of the foot which is the most

effective of motion, and the flexure of that part; but the heel lies

at the back, and the anklebones lie laterally, earwise. The arms are

situated to right and left, and bend inwards: so that the

convexities formed by bent arms and legs are practically face to

face with one another in the case of man.

    As for the senses and for the organs of sensation, the eyes,

the nostrils, and the tongue, all alike are situated frontwards; the

sense of hearing, and the organ of hearing, the ear, is situated

sideways, on the same horizontal plane with the eyes. The eyes in

man are, in proportion to his size, nearer to one another than in

any other animal.

    Of the senses man has the sense of touch more refined than any

animal, and so also, but in less degree, the sense of taste; in the

development of the other senses he is surpassed by a great number of

animals.






                                  16



    The parts, then, that are externally visible are arranged in the

way above stated, and as a rule have their special designations, and

from use and wont are known familiarly to all; but this is not the

case with the inner parts. For the fact is that the inner parts of man

are to a very great extent unknown, and the consequence is that we

must have recourse to an examination of the inner parts of other

animals whose nature in any way resembles that of man.

    In the first place then, the brain lies in the front part of the

head. And this holds alike with all animals possessed of a brain;

and all blooded animals are possessed thereof, and, by the way,

molluscs as well. But, taking size for size of animal, the largest

brain, and the moistest, is that of man. Two membranes enclose it: the

stronger one near the bone of the skull; the inner one, round the

brain itself, is finer. The brain in all cases is bilateral. Behind

this, right at the back, comes what is termed the 'cerebellum',

differing in form from the brain as we may both feel and see.

    The back of the head is with all animals empty and hollow,

whatever be its size in the different animals. For some creatures have

big heads while the face below is small in proportion, as is the

case with round-faced animals; some have little heads and long jaws,

as is the case, without exception, among animals of the

mane-and-tail species.

    The brain in all animals is bloodless, devoid of veins, and

naturally cold to the touch; in the great majority of animals it has a

small hollow in its centre. The brain-caul around it is reticulated

with veins; and this brain-caul is that skin-like membrane which

closely surrounds the brain. Above the brain is the thinnest and

weakest bone of the head, which is termed or 'sinciput'.

    From the eye there go three ducts to the brain: the largest and

the medium-sized to the cerebellum, the least to the brain itself; and

the least is the one situated nearest to the nostril. The two

largest ones, then, run side by side and do not meet; the medium-sized

ones meet-and this is particularly visible in fishes,-for they lie

nearer than the large ones to the brain; the smallest pair are the

most widely separate from one another, and do not meet.

    Inside the neck is what is termed the oesophagus (whose other

name is derived oesophagus from its length and narrowness), and the

windpipe. The windpipe is situated in front of the oesophagus in all

animals that have a windpipe, and all animals have one that are

furnished with lungs. The windpipe is made up of gristle, is sparingly

supplied with blood, and is streaked all round with numerous minute

veins; it is situated, in its upper part, near the mouth, below the

aperture formed by the nostrils into the mouth-an aperture through

which, when men, in drinking, inhale any of the liquid, this liquid

finds its way out through the nostrils. In betwixt the two openings

comes the so-called epiglottis, an organ capable of being drawn over

and covering the orifice of the windpipe communicating with the mouth;

the end of the tongue is attached to the epiglottis. In the other

direction the windpipe extends to the interval between the lungs,

and hereupon bifurcates into each of the two divisions of the lung;

for the lung in all animals possessed of the organ has a tendency to

be double. In viviparous animals, however, the duplication is not so

plainly discernible as in other species, and the duplication is

least discernible in man. And in man the organ is not split into

many parts, as is the case with some vivipara, neither is it smooth,

but its surface is uneven.

    In the case of the ovipara, such as birds and oviparous

quadrupeds, the two parts of the organ are separated to a distance

from one another, so that the creatures appear to be furnished with

a pair of lungs; and from the windpipe, itself single, there branch

off two separate parts extending to each of the two divisions of the

lung. It is attached also to the great vein and to what is

designated the 'aorta'. When the windpipe is charged with air, the air

passes on to the hollow parts of the lung. These parts have divisions,

composed of gristle, which meet at an acute angle; from the

divisions run passages through the entire lung, giving off smaller and

smaller ramifications. The heart also is attached to the windpipe,

by connexions of fat, gristle, and sinew; and at the point of juncture

there is a hollow. When the windpipe is charged with air, the entrance

of the air into the heart, though imperceptible in some animals, is

perceptible enough in the larger ones. Such are the properties of

the windpipe, and it takes in and throws out air only, and takes in

nothing else either dry or liquid, or else it causes you pain until

you shall have coughed up whatever may have gone down.

    The oesophagus communicates at the top with the mouth, close to

the windpipe, and is attached to the backbone and the windpipe by

membranous ligaments, and at last finds its way through the midriff

into the belly. It is composed of flesh-like substance, and is elastic

both lengthways and breadthways.

    The stomach of man resembles that of a dog; for it is not much

bigger than the bowel, but is somewhat like a bowel of more than usual

width; then comes the bowel, single, convoluted, moderately wide.

The lower part of the gut is like that of a pig; for it is broad,

and the part from it to the buttocks is thick and short. The caul,

or great omentum, is attached to the middle of the stomach, and

consists of a fatty membrane, as is the case with all other animals

whose stomachs are single and which have teeth in both jaws.

    The mesentery is over the bowels; this also is membranous and

broad, and turns to fat. It is attached to the great vein and the

aorta, and there run through it a number of veins closely packed

together, extending towards the region of the bowels, beginning

above and ending below.

    So much for the properties of the oesophagus, the windpipe, and

the stomach.






                                  17



    The heart has three cavities, and is situated above the lung at

the division of the windpipe, and is provided with a fatty and thick

membrane where it fastens on to the great vein and the aorta. It

lies with its tapering portion upon the aorta, and this portion is

similarly situated in relation to the chest in all animals that have a

chest. In all animals alike, in those that have a chest and in those

that have none, the apex of the heart points forwards, although this

fact might possibly escape notice by a change of position under

dissection. The rounded end of the heart is at the top. The apex is to

a great extent fleshy and close in texture, and in the cavities of the

heart are sinews. As a rule the heart is situated in the middle of the

chest in animals that have a chest, and in man it is situated a little

to the left-hand side, leaning a little way from the division of the

breasts towards the left breast in the upper part of the chest.

    The heart is not large, and in its general shape it is not

elongated; in fact, it is somewhat round in form: only, be it

remembered, it is sharp-pointed at the bottom. It has three

cavities, as has been said: the right-hand one the largest of the

three, the left-hand one the least, and the middle one intermediate in

size. All these cavities, even the two small ones, are connected by

passages with the lung, and this fact is rendered quite plain in one

of the cavities. And below, at the point of attachment, in the largest

cavity there is a connexion with the great vein (near which the

mesentery lies); and in the middle one there is a connexion with the

aorta.

    Canals lead from the heart into the lung, and branch off just

as the windpipe does, running all over the lung parallel with the

passages from the windpipe. The canals from the heart are uppermost;

and there is no common passage, but the passages through their

having a common wall receive the breath and pass it on to the heart;

and one of the passages conveys it to the right cavity, and the

other to the left.

    With regard to the great vein and the aorta we shall, by and

by, treat of them together in a discussion devoted to them and to them

alone. In all animals that are furnished with a lung, and that are

both internally and externally viviparous, the lung is of all organs

the most richly supplied with blood; for the lung is throughout spongy

in texture, and along by every single pore in it go branches from

the great vein. Those who imagine it to be empty are altogether

mistaken; and they are led into their error by their observation of


lungs removed from animals under dissection, out of which organs the

blood had all escaped immediately after death.

    Of the other internal organs the heart alone contains blood.

And the lung has blood not in itself but in its veins, but the heart

has blood in itself; for in each of its three cavities it has blood,

but the thinnest blood is what it has in its central cavity.

    Under the lung comes the thoracic diaphragm or midriff,

attached to the ribs, the hypochondria and the backbone, with a thin

membrane in the middle of it. It has veins running through it; and the

diaphragm in the case of man is thicker in proportion to the size of

his frame than in other animals.

    Under the diaphragm on the right-hand side lies the 'liver',

and on the left-hand side the 'spleen', alike in all animals that

are provided with these organs in an ordinary and not preternatural

way; for, be it observed, in some quadrupeds these organs have been

found in a transposed position. These organs are connected with the

stomach by the caul.

    To outward view the spleen of man is narrow and long,

resembling the self-same organ in the pig. The liver in the great

majority of animals is not provided with a 'gall-bladder'; but the

latter is present in some. The liver of a man is round-shaped, and

resembles the same organ in the ox. And, by the way, the absence above

referred to of a gall-bladder is at times met with in the practice

of augury. For instance, in a certain district of the Chalcidic

settlement in Euboea the sheep are devoid of gall-bladders; and in

Naxos nearly all the quadrupeds have one so large that foreigners when

they offer sacrifice with such victims are bewildered with fright,

under the impression that the phenomenon is not due to natural causes,

but bodes some mischief to the individual offerers of the sacrifice.

    Again, the liver is attached to the great vein, but it has no

communication with the aorta; for the vein that goes off from the

great vein goes right through the liver, at a point where are the

so-called 'portals' of the liver. The spleen also is connected only

with the great vein, for a vein extends to the spleen off from it.

    After these organs come the 'kidneys', and these are placed close

to the backbone, and resemble in character the same organ in kine.

In all animals that are provided with this organ, the right kidney

is situated higher up than the other. It has also less fatty substance

than the left-hand one and is less moist. And this phenomenon also

is observable in all the other animals alike.

    Furthermore, passages or ducts lead into the kidneys both from

the great vein and from the aorta, only not into the cavity. For, by

the way, there is a cavity in the middle of the kidney, bigger in some

creatures and less in others; but there is none in the case of the

seal. This latter animal has kidneys resembling in shape the identical

organ in kine, but in its case the organs are more solid than in any

other known creature. The ducts that lead into the kidneys lose

themselves in the substance of the kidneys themselves; and the proof

that they extend no farther rests on the fact that they contain no

blood, nor is any clot found therein. The kidneys, however, have, as

has been said, a small cavity. From this cavity in the kidney there

lead two considerable ducts or ureters into the bladder; and others

spring from the aorta, strong and continuous. And to the middle of

each of the two kidneys is attached a hollow sinewy vein, stretching

right along the spine through the narrows; by and by these veins are

lost in either loin, and again become visible extending to the

flank. And these off-branchings of the veins terminate in the bladder.

For the bladder lies at the extremity, and is held in position by

the ducts stretching from the kidneys, along the stalk that extends to

the urethra; and pretty well all round it is fastened by fine sinewy

membranes, that resemble to some extent the thoracic diaphragm. The

bladder in man is, proportionately to his size, tolerably large.

    To the stalk of the bladder the private part is attached, the

external orifices coalescing; but a little lower down, one of the

openings communicates with the testicles and the other with the

bladder. The penis is gristly and sinewy in its texture. With it are

connected the testicles in male animals, and the properties of these

organs we shall discuss in our general account of the said organ.

    All these organs are similar in the female; for there is no

difference in regard to the internal organs, except in respect to

the womb, and with reference to the appearance of this organ I must

refer the reader to diagrams in my 'Anatomy'. The womb, however, is

situated over the bowel, and the bladder lies over the womb. But we

must treat by and by in our pages of the womb of all female animals

viewed generally. For the wombs of all female animals are not

identical, neither do their local dispositions coincide.

    These are the organs, internal and external, of man, and such

is their nature and such their local disposition.
