




Principles of Economics: An introductory volume


by Alfred Marshall


1890






Book One: Preliminary Survey



Chapter 1



Introduction





    1. Political economy or economics is a study of mankind in

the ordinary business of life; it examines that part of

individual and social action which is most closely connected with

the attainment and with the use of the material requisites of

wellbeing.

    Thus it is on the one side a study of wealth; and on the

other, and more important side, a part of the study of man. For

man's character has been moulded by his every-day work, and the

material resources which he thereby procures, more than by any

other influence unless it be that of his religious ideals; and

the two great forming agencies of the world's history have been

the religious and the economic. Here and there the ardour of the

military or the artistic spirit has been for a while predominant:

but religious and economic influences have nowhere been displaced

from the front rank even for a time; and they have nearly always

been more important than all others put together. Religious

motives are more intense than economic, but their direct action

seldom extends over so large a part of life. For the business by

which a person earns his livelihood generally fills his thoughts

during by far the greater part of those hours in which his mind

is at its best; during them his character is being formed by the

way in which he uses his faculties in his work, by the thoughts

and the feelings which it suggests, and by his relations to his

associates in work, his employers or his employees.

    And very often the influence exerted on a person's character

by the amount of his income is hardly less, if it is less, than

that exerted by the way in which it is earned. It may make little

difference to the fulness of life of a family whether its yearly

income is ?000 or ?000; but it makes a very great difference

whether the income is ?0 or ?50: for with ?50 the family has,

with ?0 it has not, the material conditions of a complete life.

It is true that in religion, in the family affections and in

friendship, even the poor may find scope for many of those

faculties which are the source of the highest happiness. But the

conditions which surround extreme poverty, especially in densely

crowded places, tend to deaden the higher faculties. Those who

have been called the Residuum of our large towns have little

opportunity for friendship; they know nothing of the decencies

and the quiet, and very little even of the unity of family life;

and religion often fails to reach them. No doubt their physical,

mental, and moral ill-health is partly due to other causes than

poverty: but this is the chief cause.

    And, in addition to the Residuum, there are vast numbers of

people both in town and country who are brought up with

insufficient food, clothing, and house-room; whose education is

broken off early in order that they may go to work for wages; who

thenceforth are engaged during long hours in exhausting toil with

imperfectly nourished bodies, and have therefore no chance of

developing their higher mental faculties. Their life is not

necessarily unhealthy or unhappy. Rejoicing in their affections

towards God and man, and perhaps even possessing some natural

refinement of feeling, they may lead lives that are far less

incomplete than those of many, who have more material wealth.

But, for all that, their poverty is a great and almost unmixed

evil to them. Even when they are well, their weariness often

amounts to pain, while their pleasures are few; and when sickness

comes, the suffering caused by poverty increases tenfold. And,

though a contented spirit may go far towards reconciling them to

these evils, there are others to which it ought not to reconcile

them. Overworked and undertaught, weary and careworn, without

quiet and without leisure, they have no chance of making the best

of their mental faculties.

    Although then some of the evils which commonly go with

poverty are not its necessary consequences; yet, broadly

speaking, "the destruction of the poor is their poverty," and the

study of the causes of poverty is the study of the causes of the

degradation of a large part of mankind.

    2. Slavery was regarded by Aristotle as an ordinance of

nature, and so probably was it by the slaves themselves in olden

time. The dignity of man was proclaimed by the Christian

religion: it has been asserted with increasing vehemence during

the last hundred years: but, only through the spread of education

during quite recent times, are we beginning to feel the full

import of the phrase. Now at last we are setting ourselves

seriously to inquire whether it is necessary that there should be

any so-called "lower classes" at all: that is, whether there need

be large numbers of people doomed from their birth to hard work

in order to provide for others the requisites of a refined and

cultured life; while they themselves are prevented by their

poverty and toil from having any share or part in that life.

    The hope that poverty and ignorance may gradually be

extinguished, derives indeed much support from the steady

progress of the working classes during the nineteenth century.

The steam-engine has relieved them of much exhausting and

degrading toil; wages have risen; education has been improved and

become more general; the railway and the printing-press have

enabled members of the same trade in different parts of the

country to communicate easily with one another, and to undertake

and carry out broad and far-seeing lines of policy; while the

growing demand for intelligent work has caused the artisan

classes to increase so rapidly that they now outnumber those

whose labour is entirely unskilled. A great part of the artisans

have ceased to belong to the "lower classes" in the sense in

which the term was originally used; and some of them already lead

a more refined and noble life than did the majority of the upper

classes even a century ago.

    This progress has done more than anything else to give

practical interest to the question whether it is really

impossible that all should start in the world with a fair chance

of leading a cultured life, free from the pains of poverty and

the stagnating influences of excessive mechanical toil; and this

question is being pressed to the front by the growing earnestness

of the age. The question cannot be fully answered by economic

science. For the answer depends partly on the moral and political

capabilities of human nature, and on these matters the economist

has no special means of information: he must do as others do, and

guess as best he can. But the answer depends in a great measure

upon facts and inferences, which are within the province of

economics; and this it is which gives to economic studies their

chief and their highest interest.

    3. It might have been expected that a science, which deals

with questions so vital for the wellbeing of mankind, would have

engaged the attention of many of the ablest thinkers of every

age, and be now well advanced towards maturity. But the fact is

that the number of scientific economists has always been small

relatively to the difficulty of the work to be done; so that the

science is still almost in its infancy. One cause of this is that

the bearing of economics on the higher wellbeing of man has been

overlooked. Indeed, a science which has wealth for its

subject-matter, is often repugnant at first sight to many

students; for those who do most to advance the boundaries of

knowledge, seldom care much about the possession of wealth for

its own sake.

    But a more important cause is that many of those conditions

of industrial life, and of those methods of production,

distribution and consumption, with which modern economic science

is concerned, are themselves only of recent date. It is indeed

true that the change in substance is in some respects not so

great as the change in outward form; and much more of modern

economic theory, than at first appears, can be adapted to the

conditions of backward races. But unity in substance, underlying

many varieties of form, is not easy to detect; and changes in

form have had the effect of making writers in all ages profit

less than they otherwise might have done by the work of their

predecessors.

    The economic conditions of modern life, though more complex,

are in many ways more definite than those of earlier times.

Business is more clearly marked off from other concerns; the

rights of individuals as against others and as against the

community are more sharply defined; and above all the

emancipation from custom, and the growth of free activity, of

constant forethought and restless enterprise, have given a new

precision and a new prominence to the causes that govern the

relative values of different things and different kinds of

labour.

    4. It is often said that the modern forms of industrial life

are distinguished from the earlier by being more competitive. But

this account is not quite satisfactory. The strict meaning of

competition seems to be the racing of one person against another,

with special reference to bidding for the sale or purchase of

anything. This kind of racing is no doubt both more intense and

more widely extended than it used to be: but it is only a

secondary, and one might almost say, an accidental consequence

from the fundamental characteristics of modern industrial life.

    There is no one term that will express these characteristics

adequately. They are, as we shall presently see, a certain

independence and habit of choosing one's own course for oneself,

a self-reliance; a deliberation and yet a promptness of choice

and judgment, and a habit of forecasting the future and of

shaping one's course with reference to distant aims. They may and

often do cause people to compete with one another; but on the

other hand they may tend, and just now indeed they are tending,

in the direction of co-operation and Combination of all kinds

good and evil. But these tendencies towards collective ownership

and collective action are quite different from those of earlier

times, because they are the result not of custom, not of any

passive drifting into association with one's neighbours, but of

free choice by each individual of that line of conduct which

after careful deliberation seems to him the best suited for

attaining his ends, whether they are selfish or unselfish.

    The term "competition" has gathered about it evil savour, and

has come to imply a certain selfishness and indifference to the

wellbeing of others. Now it is true that there is less deliberate

selfishness in early than in modern forms of industry; but there

is also less deliberate unselfishness. It is deliberateness, and

not selfishness, that is the characteristic of the modern age.

    For instance, while custom in a primitive society extends the

limits of the family, and prescribes certain duties to one's

neighbours which fall into disuse in a later civilization, it

also prescribes an attitude of hostility to strangers. In a

modern society the obligations of family kindness become more

intense, though they are concentrated on a narrower area; and

neighbours are put more nearly on the same footing with

strangers. In ordinary dealings with both of them the standard of

fairness and honesty is lower than in some of the dealings of a

primitive people with their neighbours: but it is much higher

than in their dealings with strangers. Thus it is the ties of

neighbourhood alone that have been relaxed: the ties of family

are in many ways stronger than before, family affection leads to

much more self-sacrifice and devotion than it used to do; and

sympathy with those who are strangers to us is a growing source

of a kind of deliberate unselfishness, that never existed before

the modern age. That country which is the birthplace of modern

competition devotes a larger part of its income than any other to

charitable uses, and spent twenty millions on purchasing the

freedom of the slaves in the West Indies.

    In every age poets and social reformers have tried to

stimulate the people of their own time to a nobler life by

enchanting stories of the virtues of the heroes of old. But

neither the records of history nor the contemporary observation

of backward races, when carefully studied, give any support to

the doctrine that man is on the whole harder and harsher than he

was; or that he was ever more willing than he is now to sacrifice

his own happiness for the benefit of others in cases where custom

and law have left him free to choose his own course. Among races,

whose intellectual capacity seems not to have developed in any

other direction, and who have none of the originating power of

the modern business man, there will be found many who show an

evil sagacity in driving a hard bargain in a market even with

their neighbours. No traders are more unscrupulous in taking

advantage of the necessities of the unfortunate than are the

corn-dealers and money-lenders of the East.

    Again, the modern era has undoubtedly given new openings for

dishonesty in trade. The advance of knowledge has discovered new

ways of making things appear other than they are, and has

rendered possible many new forms of adulteration. The producer is

now far removed from the ultimate consumer; and his wrong-doings

are not visited with the prompt and sharp punishment which falls

on the head of a person who, being bound to live and die in his

native village, plays a dishonest trick on one of his neighbours.

The opportunities for knavery are certainly more numerous than

they were; but there is no reason for thinking that people avail

themselves of a larger proportion of such opportunities than they

used to do. On the contrary, modern methods of trade imply habits

of trustfulness on the one side and a power of resisting

temptation to dishonesty on the other, which do not exist among a

backward people. Instances of simple truth and personal fidelity

are met with under all social conditions: but those who have

tried to establish a business of modern type in a backward

country find that they can scarcely ever depend on the native

population for filling posts of trust. It is even more difficult

to dispense with imported assistance for work, which calls for a

strong moral character, than for that which requires great skill

and mental ability. Adulteration and fraud in trade were rampant

in the middle ages to an extent that is very astonishing, when we

consider the difficulties of wrong-doing without detection at

that time.

    In every stage of civilization, in which the power of money

has been prominent, poets in verse and prose have delighted to

depict a past truly "Golden Age," before the pressure of mere

material gold had been felt. Their idyllic pictures have been

beautiful, and have stimulated noble imaginations and resolves;

but they have had very little historical truth. Small communities

with simple wants for which the bounty of nature has made

abundant provision, have indeed sometimes been nearly free from

care about their material needs, and have not been tempted to

sordid ambitions. But whenever we can penetrate to the inner life

of a crowded population under primitive conditions in our own

time, we find more want, more narrowness, and more hardness than

was manifest at a distance: and we never find a more widely

diffused comfort alloyed by less suffering than exists in the

western world to-day. We ought therefore not to brand the forces,

which have made modern civilization, by a name which suggests

evil.

    It is perhaps not reasonable that such a suggestion should

attach to the term "competition"; but in fact it does. In fact,

when competition is arraigned, its anti-social forms are made

prominent; and care is seldom taken to inquire whether there are

not other forms of it, which are so essential to the maintenance

of energy and spontaneity, that their cessation might probably be

injurious on the balance to social wellbeing. The traders or

producers, who find that a rival is offering goods at a lower

price than will yield them a good profit, are angered at his

intrusion, and complain of being wronged; even though it may be

true that those who buy the cheaper goods are in greater need

than themselves, and that the energy and resourcefulness of their

rival is a social gain. In many cases the "regulation of

competition" is a misleading term, that veils the formation of a

privileged class of producers, who often use their combined force

to frustrate the attempts of an able man to rise from a lower

class than their own. Under the pretext of repressing antisocial

competition, they deprive him of the liberty of carving out for

himself a new career, where the services rendered by him to the

consumers of the commodity would be greater than the injuries,

that he inflicts on the relatively small group which objects to

his competition.

    If competition is contrasted with energetic co-operation in

unselfish work for the public good, then even the best forms of

competition are relatively evil; while its harsher and meaner

forms are hateful. And in a world in which all men were perfectly

virtuous, competition would be out of place; but so also would be

private property and every form of private right. Men would think

only of their duties; and no one would desire to have a larger

share of the comforts and luxuries of life than his neighbours.

Strong producers could easily bear a touch of hardship; so they

would wish that their weaker neighbours, while producing less

should consume more. Happy in this thought, they would work for

the general good with all the energy, the inventiveness, and the

eager initiative that belonged to them; and mankind would be

victorious in contests with nature at every turn. Such is the

Golden Age to which poets and dreamers may look forward. But in

the responsible conduct of affairs, it is worse than folly to

ignore the imperfections which still cling to human nature.

    History in general, and especially the history of socialistic

ventures, shows that ordinary men are seldom capable of pure

ideal altruism for any considerable time together; and that the

exceptions are to be found only when the masterful fervour of a

small band of religious enthusiasts makes material concerns to

count for nothing in comparison with the higher faith.

    No doubt men, even now, are capable of much more unselfish

service than they generally render: and the supreme aim of the

economist is to discover how this latent social asset can be

developed most quickly, and turned to account most wisely. But he

must not decry competition in general, without analysis: he is

bound to retain a neutral attitude towards any particular

manifestation of it until he is sure that, human nature being

what it is, the restraint of competition would not be more

anti-social in its working than the competition itself.

    We may conclude then that the term "competition" is not well

suited to describe the special characteristics of industrial life

in the modern age. We need a term that does not imply any moral

qualities, whether good or evil, but which indicates the

undisputed fact that modern business and industry are

characterized by more self-reliant habits, more forethought, more

deliberate and free choice. There is not any one term adequate

for this purpose: but Freedom of Industry and Enterprise, or more

shortly, Economic Freedom, points in the right direction; and it

may be used in the absence of a better. Of course this deliberate

and free choice may lead to a certain departure from individual

freedom when co-operation or combination seems to offer the best

route to the desired end. The questions how far these deliberate

forms of association are likely to destroy the freedom in which

they had their origin and how far they are likely to be conducive

to the public weal, lie beyond the scope of the present

volume.(1*)

    5. This introductory chapter was followed in earlier editions

by two short sketches: the one related to the growth of free

enterprise and generally of economic freedom, and the other to

the growth of economic science. They have no claim to be

systematic histories, however compressed; they aim only at

indicating some landmarks on the routes by which economic

structure and economic thought have travelled to their present

position. They are now transferred to Appendices A and B at the

end of this volume, partly because their full drift can best be

seen after some acquaintance has been made with the

subject-matter of economics; and partly because in the twenty

years, which have elapsed since they were first written, public

opinion as to the position which the study of economic and social

science should hold in a liberal education has greatly developed.

There is less need now than formerly to insist that the economic

problems of the present generation derive much of their

subject-matter from technical and social changes that are of

recent date, and that their form as well as their urgency assume

throughout the effective economic freedom of the mass of the

people.

    The relations of many ancient Greeks and Romans with the

slaves of their households were genial and humane. But even in

Attica the physical and moral wellbeing of the great body of the

inhabitants was not accepted as a chief aim of the citizen.

Ideals of life were high, but they concerned only a. few. and the

doctrine of value, which is full of complexities in the modern

age, could then have been worked out on a plan; such as could be

conceived to-day, only if nearly all manual work were superseded

by automatic machines which required merely a definite allowance

of steam-power and materials, and had no concern with the

requirements of a full citizen's life. Much of modern economics

might indeed have been anticipated in the towns of the Middle

Ages, in which an intelligent and daring spirit was for the first

time combined with patient industry. But they were not left to

work out their career in peace; and the world had to wait for the

dawn of the new economic era till a whole nation was ready for

the ordeal of economic freedom.

    England especially was gradually prepared for the task; but

towards the end of the eighteenth century, the changes, which had

so far been slow and gradual, suddenly became rapid and violent.

Mechanical inventions, the concentration of industries, and a

system of manufacturing on a large scale for distant markets

broke up the old traditions of industry, and left everyone to

bargain for himself as best he might; and at the same time they

stimulated an increase of population for which no provision had

been made beyond standing-room in factories and workshops. Thus

free competition, or rather, freedom of industry and enterprise,

was set loose to run, like a huge untrained monster, its wayward

course. The abuse of their new power by able but uncultured

business men led to evils on every side; it unfitted mothers for

their duties, it weighed down children with overwork and disease;

and in many places it degraded the race. Meanwhile the kindly

meant recklessness of the poor law did even more to lower the

moral and physical energy of Englishmen than the hardhearted

recklessness of the manufacturing discipline: for by depriving

the people of those qualities which would fit them for the new

order of things, it increased the evil and diminished the good

caused by the advent of free enterprise.

    And yet the time at which free enterprise was showing itself

in an unnaturally harsh form, was the very time in which

economists were most lavish in their praises of it. This was

partly because they saw clearly, what we of this generation have

in a great measure forgotten, the cruelty of the yoke of custom

and rigid ordinance which it had displaced; and partly because

the general tendency of Englishmen at the time was to hold that

freedom in all matters, political and social, was worth having at

every cost except the loss of security. But partly also it was

that the productive forces which free enterprise was giving o the

nation were the only means by which it could offer a successful

resistance to Napoleon. Economists therefore treated free

enterprise not indeed as an unmixed good, but as a less evil than

such regulation as was practicable at the time.

    Adhering to the lines of thought that had been started

chiefly by medieval traders, and continued by French and English

philosophers in the latter half of the eighteenth century,

Ricardo and his followers developed a theory of the action of

free enterprise (or, as they said, free competition), which

contained many truths, that will be probably important so long as

the world exists. Their work was wonderfully complete within the

narrow area which it covered. But much of the best of it consists

of problems relating to rent and the value of corn: - problems on

the solution of which the fate of England just then seemed to

depend; but many of which, in the particular form in which they

were worked out by Ricardo, have very little direct bearing on

the present state of things.

    A good deal of the rest of their work was narrowed by its

regarding too exclusively the peculiar condition of England at

that time; and this narrowness has caused a reaction. So that

now, when more experience, more leisure, and greater material

resources have enabled us to bring free enterprise somewhat under

control, to diminish its power of doing evil and increase its

power of doing good, there is growing up among many economists a

sort of spite against it. Some even incline to exaggerate its

evils, and attribute to it the ignorance and suffering, which are

the results either of tyranny and oppression in past ages, or of

the misunderstanding and mismanagement of economic freedom.

    Intermediate between these two extremes are the great body of

economists who, working on parallel lines in many different

countries, are bringing to their studies an unbiassed desire to

ascertain the truth, and a willingness to go through with the

long and heavy work by which alone scientific results of any

value can be obtained. Varieties of mind, of temper, of training

and of opportunities lead them to work in different ways, and to

give their chief attention to different parts of the problem. All

are bound more or less to collect and arrange facts and

statistics relating to past and present times; and all are bound

to occupy themselves more or less with analysis and reasoning on

the basis of those facts which are ready at hand: but some find

the former task the more attractive and absorbing, and others the

latter. This division of labour, however, implies not opposition,

but harmony of purpose. The work of all adds something or other

to that knowledge, which enables us to understand the influences

exerted on the quality and tone of man's life by the manner in

which he earns his livelihood, and by the character of that

livelihood.



NOTES:



1. They occupy a considerable place in the forthcoming volume on

Industry and Trade.



Chapter 2



The Substance of Economics



    1. Economics is a study of men as they live and move and

think in the ordinary business of life. But it concerns itself

chiefly with those motives which affect, most powerfully and most

steadily, man's conduct in the business part of his life.

Everyone who is worth anything carries his higher nature with him

into business; and, there as elsewhere, he is influenced by his

personal affections, by his conceptions of duty and his reverence

for high ideals. And it is true that the best energies of the

ablest inventors and organizers of improved methods and

appliances are stimulated by a noble emulation more than by any

love of wealth for its own sake. But, for all that, the steadiest

motive to ordinary business work is the desire for the pay which

is the material reward of work. The pay may be on its way to be

spent selfishly or unselfishly, for noble or base ends; and here

the variety of human nature comes into play. But the motive is

supplied by a definite amount of money: and it is this definite

and exact money measurement of the steadiest motives in business

life, which has enabled economics far to outrun every other

branch of the study of man. Just as the chemist's fine balance

has made chemistry more exact than most other physical sciences;

so this economist's balance, rough and imperfect as it is, has

made economics more exact than any other branch of social

science. But of course economics cannot be compared with the

exact physical sciences: for it deals with the ever changing and

subtle forces of human nature.(1*)

    The advantage which economics has over other branches of

social science appears then to arise from the fact that its

special field of work gives rather larger opportunities for exact

methods than any other branch. It concerns itself chiefly with

those desires, aspirations and other affections of human nature,

the outward manifestations of which appear as incentives to

action in such a form that the force or quantity of the

incentives can be estimated and measured with some approach to

accuracy., and which therefore are in some degree amenable to

treatment by scientific machinery. An opening is made for the

methods and the tests of science as soon as the force of a

person's motives - not the motives themselves - can be

approximately measured by the sum of money, which he will just

give up in order to secure a desired satisfaction; or again by

the sum which is just required to induce him to undergo a certain

fatigue.

    It is essential to note that the economist does not claim to

measure any affection of the mind in itself, or directly; but

only indirectly through its effect. No one can compare and

measure accurately against one another even his own mental states

at different times: and no one can measure the mental states of

another at all except indirectly and conjecturally by their

effects. Of course various affections belong to man's higher

nature and others to his lower, and are thus different in kind.

But, even if we confine our attention to mere physical pleasures

and pains of the same kind, we find that they can only be

compared indirectly by their effects. In fact, even this

comparison is necessarily to some extent conjectural, unless they

occur to the same person at the same time.

    For instance the pleasures which two persons derive from

smoking cannot be directly compared: nor can even those which the

same person derives from it at different times. But if we find a

man in doubt whether to spend a few pence on a cigar, or a cup of

tea, or on riding home instead of walking home, then we may

follow ordinary usage, and say that he expects from them equal

pleasures.

    If then we wish to compare even physical gratifications, we

must do it not directly, but indirectly by the incentives which

they afford to action. If the desires to secure either of two

pleasures will induce people in similar circumstances each to do

just an hour's extra work, or will induce men in the same rank of

life and with the same means each to pay a shilling for it; we

then may say that those pleasures are equal for our purposes,

because the desires for them are equally strong incentives to

action for persons under similar conditions.

    Thus measuring a mental state, as men do in ordinary life, by

its motor-force or the incentive which it affords to action, no

new difficulty is introduced by the fact that some of the motives

of which we have to take account belong to man's higher nature,

and others to his lower.

    For suppose that the person, whom we saw doubting between

several little gratifications for himself, had thought after a

while of a poor invalid whom he would pass on his way home; and

had spent some time in making up his mind whether he would choose

a physical gratification for himself, or would do a kindly act

and rejoice in another's joy. As his desires turned now towards

the one, now the other, there would be change in the quality of

his mental states; and the philosopher is bound to study the

nature of the change.

    But the economist studies mental states rather through their

manifestations than in themselves; and if he finds they afford

evenly balanced incentives to action, he treats them prima facie

as for his purpose equal. He follows indeed in a more patient and

thoughtful way, and with greater precautions, what everybody is

always doing every day in ordinary life. He does not attempt to

weigh the real value of the higher affections of our nature

against those of our lower: he does not balance the love for

virtue against the desire for agreeable food. He estimates the

incentives to action by their effects just in the same way as

people do in common life. He follows the course of ordinary

conversation, differing from it only in taking more precautions

to make clear the limits of his knowledge as he goes. He reaches

his provisional conclusions by observations of men in general

under given conditions without attempting to fathom the mental

and spiritual characteristics of individuals. But he does not

ignore the mental and spiritual side of life. On the contrary,

even for the narrower uses of economic studies, it is important

to know whether the desires which prevail are such as will help

to build up a strong and righteous character. And in the broader

uses of those studies, when they are being applied to practical

problems, the economist, like every one else, must concern

himself with the ultimate aims of man, and take account of

differences in real value between gratifications that are equally

powerful incentives to action and have therefore equal economic

measures. A study of these measures is only the starting-point of

economics: but it is the starting-point.(2*)

    2. There are several other limitations of the measurement of

motive by money to be discussed. The first of these arises from

the necessity of taking account of the variations in the amount

of pleasure, or other satisfaction, represented by the same sum

of money to different persons and under different circumstances.

    A shilling may measure a greater pleasure (or other

satisfaction) at one time than at another even for the same

person; because money may be more plentiful with him, or because

his sensibility may vary.(3*) And persons whose antecedents are

similar, and who are outwardly like one another, are often

affected in very different ways by similar events. When, for

instance, a band of city school children are sent out for a day's

holiday in the country, it is probable that no two of them derive

from it enjoyment exactly the same in kind, or equal in

intensity. The same surgical operation causes different amounts

of pain to different people. Of two parents who are, so far as we

can tell, equally affectionate, one will suffer much more than

the other from the loss of a favourite son. Some who are not very

sensitive generally are yet specially susceptible to particular

kinds of pleasure and pain; while differences in nature and

education make one man's total capacity for pleasure or pain much

greater than another's.

    It would therefore not be safe to say that any two men with

the same income derive equal benefit from its use; or that they

would suffer equal pain from the same diminution of it. Although

when a tax of ? is taken from each of two persons having an

income of ?00 a year, each will give up that ? worth of

pleasure (or other satisfaction) which he can most easily part

with, i.e. each will give up what is measured to him by just ?;

yet the intensities of the satisfaction given up may not be

nearly equal.

    Nevertheless, if we take averages sufficiently broad to cause

the personal peculiarities of individuals to counterbalance one

another, the money which people of equal incomes will give to

obtain a benefit or avoid an injury is a good measure of the

benefit or injury. If there are a thousand persons living in

Sheffield, and another thousand in Leeds, each with about ?00

a-year, and a tax of ? is levied on all of them; we may be sure

that the loss of pleasure or other injury which the tax will

cause in Sheffield is of about equal importance with that which

it will cause in Leeds: and anything that increased all the

incomes by ? would give command over equivalent pleasures and

other benefits in the two towns. This probability becomes greater

still if all of them are adult males engaged in the same trade;

and therefore presumably somewhat similar in sensibility and

temperament, in taste and education. Nor is the probability much

diminished, if we take the family as our unit, and compare the

loss of pleasure that results from diminishing by ? the income

of each of a thousand families with incomes of ?00 a-year in the

two places.

    Next we must take account of the fact that a stronger

incentive will be required to induce a person to pay a given

price for anything if he is poor than if he is rich. A shilling

is the measure of less pleasure, or satisfaction of any kind, to

a rich man than to a poor one. A rich man in doubt whether to

spend a shilling on a single cigar, is weighing against one

another smaller pleasures than a poor man, who is doubting

whether to spend a shilling on a supply of tobacco that will last

him for a month. The clerk with ?00 a-year will walk to business

in a much heavier rain than the clerk with ?00 a-year; for the

cost of a ride by tram or omnibus measures a greater benefit to

the poorer man than to the richer. If the poorer man spends the

money, he will suffer more from the want of it afterwards than

the richer would. The benefit that is measured in the poorer

man's mind by the cost is greater than that measured by it in the

richer man's mind.

    But this source of error also is lessened when we are able to

consider the actions and the motives of large groups of people.

If we know, for instance, that a bank failure has taken ?00,000

from the people of Leeds and ?00,000 from those of Sheffield, we

may fairly assume that the suffering caused in Leeds has been

about twice as great as in Sheffield; unless indeed we have some

special reason for believing that the shareholders of the bank in

the one town were a richer class than those in the other; or that

the loss of employment caused by it pressed in uneven proportions

on the working classes in the two towns.

    By far the greater number of the events with which economics

deals affect in about equal proportions all the different classes

of society; so that if the money measures of the happiness caused

by two events are equal, it is reasonable and in accordance with

common usage to regard the amounts of the happiness in the two

cases as equivalent. And, further, as money is likely to be

turned to the higher uses of life in about equal proportions, by

any two large groups of people taken without special bias from

any two parts of the western world, there is even some prima

facie probability that equal additions to their material

resources will make about equal additions to the fulness of life,

and true progress of the human race.

    3. To pass to another point. When we speak of the measurement

of desire by the action to which it forms the incentive, it is

not to be supposed that we assume every action to be deliberate,

and the outcome of calculation. For in this, as in every other

respect, economics takes man just as he is in ordinary life: and

in ordinary life people do not weigh beforehand the results of

every action, whether the impulses to it come from their higher

nature or their lower.(4*)

    Now the side of life with which economics is specially

concerned is that in which man's conduct is most deliberate, and

in which he most often reckons up the advantages and

disadvantages of any particular action before he enters on it.

And further it is that side of his life in which, when he does

follow habit and custom, and proceeds for the moment without

calculation, the habits and customs themselves are most nearly

sure to have arisen from a close and careful watching the

advantages and disadvantages of different courses of conduct.

There will not in general have been any formal reckoning up of

two sides of a balance-sheet: but men going home from their day's

work, or in their social meetings, will have said to one another,

"It did not answer to do this, it would have been better to do

that," and so on. What makes one course answer better than

another, will not necessarily be a selfish gain, nor any material

gain; and it will often have been argued that." though this or

that plan saved a little trouble or a little money, yet it was

not fair to others," and "it made one look mean," or "it made one

feel mean." It is true that when a habit or a custom, which has

grown up under one set of conditions, influences action under

other conditions, there is so far no exact relation between the

effort and the end which is attained by it. In backward countries

there are still many habits and customs similar to those that

lead a beaver in confinement to build himself a dam; they are

full of suggestiveness to the historian, and must be reckoned

with by the legislator. But in business matters in the modern

world such habits quickly die away.

    Thus then the most systematic part of people's lives is

generally that by which they earn their living. The work of all

those engaged in any one occupation can be carefully observed;

general statements can be made about it, and tested by comparison

with the results of other observations; and numerical estimates

can be framed as to the amount of money or general purchasing

power that is required to supply a sufficient motive for them.

    The unwillingness to postpone enjoyment, and thus to save for

future use, is measured by the interest on accumulated wealth

which just affords a sufficient incentive to save for the future.

This measurement presents however some special difficulties, the

study of which must be postponed.

    4. Here, as elsewhere, we must bear in mind that the desire

to make money does not itself necessarily proceed from motives of

a low order, even when it is to be spent on oneself. Money is a

means towards ends, and if the ends are noble, the desire for the

means is not ignoble. The lad who works hard and saves all he

can, in order to be able to pay his way afterwards at a

University, is eager for money; but his eagerness is not ignoble.

In short, money is general purchasing power, and is sought as a

means to all kinds of ends, high as well as low, spiritual as

well as material.(5*)

    Thus though it is true that "money" or "general purchasing

power" or "command over material wealth", is the centre around

which economic science clusters; this is so, not because money or

material wealth is regarded as the main aim of human effort, nor

even as affording the main subject-matter for the study of the

economist, but because in this world of ours it is the one

convenient means of measuring human motive on a large scale. If

the older economists had made this clear, they would have escaped

many grievous misrepresentations; and the splendid teachings of

Carlyle and Ruskin as to the right aims of human endeavour and

the right uses of wealth, would not then have been marred by

bitter attacks on economics, based on the mistaken belief that

that science had no concern with any motive except the selfish

desire for wealth, or even that it inculcated a policy of sordid

selfishness.(6*)

    Again, when the motive to a man's action is spoken of as

supplied by the money which he will earn, it is not meant that

his mind is closed to all other considerations save those of

gain. For even the most purely business relations of life assume

honesty and good faith; while many of them take for granted, if

not generosity, yet at least the absence of meanness, and the

pride which every honest man takes in acquitting himself well.

Again, much of the work by which people earn their living is

pleasurable in itself; and there is truth in the contention of

socialists that more of it might be made so. Indeed even business

work, that seems at first sight unattractive, often yields a

great pleasure by offering scope for the exercise of men's

faculties, and for their instincts of emulation and of power. For

just as a racehorse or an athlete strains every nerve to get in

advance of his competitors, and delights in the strain; so a

manufacturer or a trader is often stimulated much more by the

hope of victory over his rivals than by the desire to add

something to his fortune.(7*)

    5. It has indeed always been the practice of economists to

take careful account of all the advantages which attract people

generally towards an occupation, whether they appear in a money

form or not. Other things being equal, people will prefer an

occupation in which they do not need to soil their hands, in

which they enjoy a good social position, and so on; and since

these advantages affect, not indeed every one exactly in the same

way, but most people in nearly the same way, their attractive

force can be estimated and measured by the money wages to which

they are regarded as equivalent.

    Again, the desire to earn the approval, to avoid the contempt

of those around one is a stimulus to action which often works

with some sort of uniformity in any class of persons at a given

time and place; though local and temporary conditions influence

greatly not only the intensity of the desire for approval, but

also the range of persons whose approval is desired. A

professional man, for instance, or an artisan will be very

sensitive to the approval or disapproval of those in the same

occupation, and care little for that of other people; and there

are many economic problems, the discussion of which would be

altogether unreal, if care were not taken to watch the direction

and to estimate pretty closely the force of motives such as

these.

    As there may be a taint of selfishness in a man's desire to

do what seems likely to benefit his fellow-workers, so there may

be an element of personal pride in his desire that his family

should prosper during his life and after it. But still the family

affections generally are so pure a form of altruism, that their

action might have shown little semblance of regularity, had it

not been for the uniformity in the family relations themselves.

As it is, their action is fairly regular; and it has always been

fully reckoned with by economists, especially in relation to the

distribution of the family income between its various members,

the expenses of preparing children for their future career, and

the accumulation of wealth to be enjoyed after the death of him

by whom it has been earned.

    It is then not the want of will but the want of power, that

prevents economists from reckoning in the action of motives such

as these; and they welcome the fact that some kinds of

philanthropic action can be described in statistical returns, and

can to a certain extent be reduced to law, if sufficiently broad

averages are taken. For indeed there is scarcely any motive so

fitful and irregular, but that some law with regard to it can be

detected by the aid of wide and patient observation. It would

perhaps be possible even now to predict with tolerable closeness

the subscriptions that a population of a hundred thousand

Englishmen of average wealth will give to support hospitals and

chapels and missions; and, in so far as this can be done, there

is a basis for an economic discussion of supply and demand with

reference to the services of hospital nurses, missionaries and

other religious ministers. It will however probably be always

true that the greater part of those actions, which are due to a

feeling of duty and love of one's neighbour, cannot be classed,

reduced to law and measured; and it is for this reason, and not

because they are not based on self-interest, that the machinery

of economics cannot be brought to bear on them.

    6. Perhaps the earlier English economists confined their

attention too much to the motives of individual action. But in

fact economists, like all other students of social science, are

concerned with individuals chiefly as members of the social

organism. As a cathedral is something more than the stones of

which it is made, as a person is something more than a series of

thoughts and feelings, so the life of society is something more

than the sum of the lives of its individual members. It is true

that the action of the whole is made up of that of its

constituent parts; and that in most economic problems the best

starting-point is to be found in the motives that affect the

individual, regarded not indeed as an isolated atom, but as a

member of some particular trade or industrial group; but it is

also true, as German writers have well urged, that economics has

a great and an increasing concern in motives connected with the

collective ownership of property, and the collective pursuit of

important aims. The growing earnestness of the age, the growing

intelligence of the mass of the people, and the growing power of

the telegraph, the press, and other means of communication are

ever widening the scope of collective action for the public good;

and these changes, together with the spread of the co-operative

movement, and other kinds of voluntary association are growing up

under the influence of various motives besides that of pecuniary

gain: they are ever opening to the economist new opportunities of

measuring motives whose action it had seemed impossible to reduce

to any sort of law.   But in fact the variety of motives, the

difficulties of measuring them, and the manner of overcoming

those difficulties are among the chief subjects with which we

shall be occupied in this treatise. Almost every point touched in

the present chapter will need to be discussed in fuller detail

with reference to some one or more of the leading problems of

economics.

    7. To conclude provisionally: economists study the actions of

individuals, but study them in relation to social rather than

individual life; and therefore concern themselves but little with

personal peculiarities of temper and character. They watch

carefully the conduct of a whole class of people, sometimes the

whole of a nation, sometimes only those living in a certain

district, more often those engaged in some particular trade at

some time and place: and by the aid of statistics, or in other

ways, they ascertain how much money on the average the members of

the particular group, they are watching, are just willing to pay

as the price of a certain thing which they desire, or how much

must be offered to them to induce them to undergo a certain

effort or abstinence that they dislike. The measurement of motive

thus obtained is not indeed perfectly accurate; for if it were,

economics would rank with the most advanced of the physical

sciences; and not, as it actually does, with the least advanced.

    But yet the measurement is accurate enough to enable

experienced persons to forecast fairly well the extent of the

results that will follow from changes in which motives of this

kind are chiefly concerned. Thus, for instance, they can estimate

very closely the payment that will be required to produce an

adequate supply of labour of any grade, from the lowest to the

highest, for a new trade which it is proposed to start in any

place. When they visit a factory of a kind that they have never

seen before, they can tell within a shilling or two a week what

any particular worker is earning, by merely observing how far his

is a skilled occupation and what strain it involves on his

physical, mental and moral faculties. And they can predict with

tolerable certainty what rise of price will result from a given

diminution of the supply of a certain thing, and how that

increased price will react on the supply.

    And, starting from simple considerations of this kind, is

economists go on to analyse the causes which govern the local

distribution of different kinds of industry, the terms on which

people living in distant places exchange their goods with one

another, and so on: and they can explain and predict the ways in

which fluctuations of credit will affect foreign trade; or again

the extent to which the burden of a tax will be shifted from

those on whom it is levied, on to those for whose wants they

cater; and so on.

    In all this they deal with man as he is: not with an abstract

or "economic" man; but a man of flesh and blood. They deal with a

man who is largely influenced by egoistic motives in his business

life to a great extent with reference to them; but who is also

neither above vanity and recklessness, nor below delight in doing

his work well for its own sake, or in sacrificing himself for the

good of his family, his neighbours, or his country; a man who is

not below the love of a virtuous life for its own sake. They deal

with man as he is: but being concerned chiefly with those aspects

of life in which the action of motive is so regular that it can

be predicted, and the estimate of the motor-forces can be

verified by results, they have established their work on a

scientific basis.

    For in the first place, they deal with facts which can be

observed, and quantities which can be measured and recorded; so

that when differences of opinion arise with regard to them, the

differences can be brought to the test of public and

well-established records; and thus science obtains a solid basis

on which to work. In the second place, the problems, which are

grouped as economic, because they relate specially to man's

conduct under the influence of motives that are measurable by a

money price, are found to make a fairly homogeneous group. Of

course they have a great deal of subject-matter in common: that

is obvious from the nature of the case. But, though not so

obvious a priori, it will also be found to be true that there is

a fundamental unity of form underlying all the chief of them; and

that in consequence, by studying them together, the same kind of

economy is gained, as by sending a single postman to deliver all

the letters in a certain street, instead of each one entrusting

his letters to a separate messenger. For the analyses and

organized processes of reasoning that are wanted for any one

group of them, will be found generally useful for other groups.

    The less then we trouble ourselves with scholastic inquiries

as to whether a certain consideration comes within the scope of

economics, the better. If the matter is important let us take

account of it as far as we can. If it is one as to which there

exist divergent opinions, such as cannot be brought to the test

of exact and well-ascertained knowledge; if it is one on which

the general machinery of economic analysis and reasoning cannot

get any grip, then let us leave it aside in our purely economic

studies. But let us do so simply because the attempt to include

it would lessen the certainty and the exactness of our economic

knowledge without any commensurate gain; and remembering always

that some sort of account of it must be taken by our ethical

instincts and our common sense, when they as ultimate arbiters

come to apply to practical issues the knowledge obtained and

arranged by economics and other sciences.



NOTES:



1. Some remarks on the relation of economics to the sum total of

social science will be found in Appendix C, sections 1, 2.



2. The objections raised by some philosophers to speaking of two

pleasures as equal, under any circumstances, seem to apply only

to uses of the phrase other than those with which the economist

is concerned. It has however unfortunately happened that the

customary uses of economic terms have sometimes suggested the

belief that economists are adherents of the philosophical system

of Hedonism or of Utilitarianism. For, while they have generally

taken for granted that the greatest pleasures are those which

come with the endeavour to do one's duty, they have spoken of

"pleasures" and "pains" as supplying the motives to all action;

and they have thus brought themselves under the censure of those

philosophers, with whom it is a matter of principle to insist

that the desire to do one's duty is a different thing from a

desire for the pleasure which, if one happens to think of the

matter at all, one may expect from doing it; though perhaps it

may be not incorrectly described as a desire for

"self-satisfaction" or "the satisfaction of the permanent self."

(See for instance T.H. Green, Prolegomena to Ethics, pp. 165-6)

    It is clearly not the part of economics to appear to take a

side in ethical controversy: and since there is a general

agreement that all incentives to action, in so far as they are

conscious desires at all, may without impropriety be spoken of

shortly as desires for "satisfaction," it may perhaps be well to

use this word instead of "pleasure," when occasion arises for

referring to the aims of all desires, whether appertaining to

man's higher or lower nature. The simple antithesis to

satisfaction is "dissatisfaction": but perhaps it may be well to

use the shorter and equally colourless word "detriment". in its

place.

    It may however be noted that some followers of Bentham

(though perhaps not Bentham himself) made this large use of "pain

and pleasure" serve as a bridge by which to pass from

individualistic Hedonism to a complete ethical creed, without

recognizing the necessity for the introduction of an independent

major premiss; and for such a premiss the necessity would appear

to be absolute, although opinions will perhaps always differ as

to its form. Some will regard it as the Categorical Imperative;

while others will regard it as a simple belief that, whatever be

the origin of our moral instincts, their indications are borne

out by a Verdict of the experience of mankind to the effect that

true happiness is not to be had without self-respect, and that

self-respect is to be had only on the condition of endeavouring

so to live as to promote the progress of the human race.



3. Compare Edgeworth's Mathematical Psychics.



4. This is specially true of that group of gratifications, which

is sometimes named "the pleasures of the chase." They include not

only the light-hearted emulation of games and pastimes, of hunts

and steeplechases, but the more serious contests of professional

and business life: and they will occupy a good deal of our

attention in discussions of the causes that govern wages and

profits, and forms of industrial organization.

    Some people are of wayward temperament, and could give no

good account even to themselves of the motives of their action.

But if a man is steadfast and thoughtful, even his impulses are

the products of habits which he has adopted more or less

deliberately. And, whether these impulses are an expression of

his higher nature or not; whether they spring from mandates of

his conscience, the pressure of social connection, or the claims

of his bodily wants, he yields a certain relative precedence to

them without reflection now, because on previous occasions he has

decided deliberately to yield that relative precedence. The

predominant attractiveness of one course of action over others,

even when not the result of calculation at the time, is the

product of more or less deliberate decisions made by him before

in somewhat similar cases.



5. See an admirable essay by Cliffe Leslie on The Love of Money.

We do indeed hear of people who pursue money for its own sake

without caring for what it will purchase, especially at the end

of a long life spent in business: but in this as in other cases

the habit of doing a thing is kept up after the purpose for which

it was originally done has ceased to exist. The possession of

wealth gives such people a feeling of power over their

fellow-creatures, and insures them a sort of envious respect in

which they find a bitter but strong pleasure.



6. In fact a world can be conceived in which there is a science

of economics very much like our own, but in it there is no money

of any sort. See Appendices B, sec. 8 and D, sec. 2.



7. Some remarks on the large scope of economics as conceived in

Germany will be found in Appendix D, sec. 3.



Chapter 3



Economic Generalization or Laws



    1. It is the business of economics, as of almost every other

science, to collect facts, to arrange and interpret them, and to

draw inferences from them. "Observation and description,

definition and classification are the preparatory activities. But

what we desire to reach thereby is a knowledge of the

interdependence of economic phenomena.... Induction and deduction

are both needed for scientific thought as the right and left foot

are both needed for walking."(1*) The methods required for this

twofold work are not peculiar to economics; they are the common

property of all sciences. All the devices for the discovery of

the relations between cause and effect, which are described in

treatises on scientific method, have to be used in their turn by

the economist: there is not any one method of investigation which

can properly be called the method of economics; but every method

must be made serviceable in its proper place, either singly or in

combination with others. And as the number of combinations that

can be made on the chess-board, is so great that probably no two

games exactly alike were ever played; so no two games which the

student plays with nature to wrest from her her hidden truths,

which were worth playing at all, ever made use of quite the same

methods in quite the same way.

    But in some branches of economic inquiry and for some

purposes, it is more urgent to ascertain new facts, than to

trouble ourselves with the mutual relations and explanations of

those which we already have. While in other branches there is

still so much uncertainty as to whether those causes of any event

which lie on the surface and suggest themselves at first are both

true causes of it and the only causes of it, that it is even more

urgently needed to scrutinize our reasoning about facts which we

already know, than to seek for more facts.

    For this and other reasons, there always has been and there

probably always will be a need for the existence side by side of

workers with different aptitudes and different aims, some of whom

give their chief attention to the ascertainment of facts, while

others give their chief attention to scientific analysis; that is

taking to pieces complex facts, and studying the relations of the

several parts to one another and to cognate facts. It is to be

hoped that these two schools will always exist; each doing its

own work thoroughly, and each making use of the work of the

other. Thus best may we obtain sound generalizations as to the

past and trustworthy guidance from it for the future.

    2. Those physical sciences, which have progressed most beyond

the points to which they were brought by the brilliant genius of

the Greeks, are not all of them strictly speaking "exact

sciences." But they all aim at exactness. That is they all aim at

precipitating the result of a multitude of observations into

provisional statements, which are sufficiently definite to be

brought under test by other observations of nature. These

statements, when first put forth, seldom claim a high authority.

But after they have been tested by many independent observations,

and especially after they have been applied successfully in the

prediction of coming events, or of the results of new

experiments, they graduate as laws. A science progresses by

increasing the number and exactness of its laws; by submitting

them to tests of ever increasing severity; and by enlarging their

scope till a single broad law contains and supersedes a number of

narrower laws, which have been shown to be special instances of

it.

    In so far as this is done by any science, a student of it can

in certain cases say with authority greater than his own (greater

perhaps than that of any thinker, however able, who relies on his

own resources and neglects the results obtained by previous

workers), what results are to be expected from certain

conditions, or what are the true causes of a certain known event.

    Although the subject-matter of some progressive physical

sciences is not, at present at least, capable of perfectly exact

measurement; yet their progress depends on the multitudinous

co-operation of armies of workers. They measure their facts and

define their statements as closely as they can: so that each

investigator may start as nearly as possible where those before

him left off. Economics aspires to a place in this group of

sciences: because though its measurements are seldom exact, and

are never final; yet it is ever working to make them more exact,

and thus to enlarge the range of matters on which the individual

student may speak with the authority of his science.

    3. Let us then consider more closely the nature of economic

laws, and their limitations. Every cause has a tendency to

produce some definite result if nothing occurs to hinder it. Thus

gravitation tends to make things fall to the ground: but when a

balloon is full of gas lighter than air, the pressure of the air

will make it rise in spite of the tendency of gravitation to make

it fall. The law of gravitation states how any two things attract

one another. how they tend to move towards one another, and will

'move towards one another if nothing interferes to prevent them.

The law of gravitation is therefore a statement of tendencies.

    It is a very exact statement - so exact that mathematicians

can calculate a Nautical Almanac, which will show the moments at

which each satellite of Jupiter will hide itself behind Jupiter.

They make this calculation for many years beforehand; and

navigators take it to sea, and use it in finding out where they

are. Now there are no economic tendencies which act as steadily

and can be measured as exactly as gravitation can: and

consequently there are no laws of economics which can be compared

for precision with the law of gravitation.

    But let us look at a science less exact than astronomy. The

science of the tides explains how the tide rises and falls twice

a day under the action of the sun and the moon: how there are

strong tides at new and full moon, and weak tides at the moon's

first and third quarter; and how the tide running up into a

closed channel, like that of the Severn, will be very high; and

so on. Thus, having studied the lie of the land and the water all

round the British isles, people can calculate beforehand when the

tide will probably be at its highest on any day at London Bridge

or at Gloucester; and how high it will be there. They have to use

the word probably, which the astronomers do not need to use when

talking about the eclipses of Jupiter's satellites. For, though

many forces act upon Jupiter and his satellites, each one of them

acts in a definite manner which can be predicted beforehand: but

no one knows enough about the weather to be able to say

beforehand how it will act. A heavy downpour of rain in the upper

Thames valley, or a strong north-east wind in the German Ocean,

may make the tides at London Bridge differ a good deal from what

had been expected.

    The laws of economics are to be compared with the laws of the

tides, rather than with the simple and exact law of gravitation.

For the actions of men are so various and uncertain, that the

best statement of tendencies, which we can make in a science of

human conduct, must needs be inexact and faulty. This might be

urged as a reason against making any statements at all on the

subject; but that would be almost to abandon life. Life is human

conduct, and the thoughts and emotions that grow up around it. By

the fundamental impulses of our nature we all-high and low,

learned and unlearned-are in our several degrees constantly

striving to understand the courses of human action, and to shape

them for our purposes, whether selfish or unselfish, whether

noble or ignoble. And since we must form to ourselves some

notions of the tendencies of human action, our choice is between

forming those notions carelessly and forming them carefully. The

harder the task, the greater the need for steady patient inquiry;

for turning to account the experience, that has been reaped by

the more advanced physical sciences; and for framing as best we

can well thought-out estimates, or provisional laws, of the

tendencies of human action.

    4. The term "law" means then nothing more than a general

proposition or statement of tendencies, more or less certain,

more or less definite. Many such statements are made in every

science: but we do not, indeed we can not, give to all of them a

formal character and name them as laws. We must select; and the

selection is directed less by purely scientific considerations

than by practical convenience. If there is any general statement

which we want to bring to bear so often, that the trouble of

quoting it at length, when needed, is greater than that of

burdening the discussion with an additional formal statement and

an additional technical name, then it receives a special name,

otherwise not.(2*)

    Thus a law of social science, or a Social Law, is a statement

of social tendencies; that is, a statement that a certain course

of action may be expected under certain conditions from the

members of a social group.

    Economic laws, or statements of economic tendencies, are

those social laws which relate to branches of conduct in which

the strength of the motives chiefly concerned can be measured by

a money price.

    There is thus no hard and sharp line of division between

those social laws which are, and those which are not, to be

regarded also as economic laws. For there is a continuous

gradation from social laws concerned almost exclusively with

motives that can be measured by price, to social laws in which

such motives have little place; and which are therefore generally

as much less precise and exact than economic laws, as those are

than the laws of the more exact physical sciences.

    Corresponding to the substantive "law" is the adjective

"legal". But this term is used only in connection with "law" in

the sense of an ordinance of government; not in connection with

"law" the sense of a statement of relation between cause and

effect. The adjective used for this purpose is derived from

"norma", a term which is nearly equivalent to "law", and might

perhaps with advantage be substituted for it in scientific

discussions. And following our definition of an economic law, we

may say that the course of action which may be expected under

certain conditions from the members of an industrial group is the

normal action of the members of that group relatively to those

conditions.

    This use of the term Normal has been misunderstood; and it

may be well to say something as to the unity in difference which

underlies various uses of the term. When we talk of a Good man or

a Strong man, we refer to excellence or strength of those

particular physical mental or moral qualities which are indicated

in the context. A strong judge has seldom the same qualities as a

strong rower; a good jockey is not always of exceptional virtue.

In the same way every use of the term normal implies the

predominance of certain tendencies which appear likely to be more

or less steadfast and persistent in their action over those which

are relatively exceptional and intermittent. Illness is an

abnormal condition of man: but a long life passed without any

illness is abnormal. During the melting of the snows, the Rhine

rises above its normal level: but in a cold dry spring when it is

less than usual above that normal level, it may be said to be

abnormally low (for that time of year). In all these cases normal

results are those which may be expected as the outcome of those

tendencies which the context suggests; or, in other words, which

are in accordance with those "statements of tendency", those Laws

or Norms, which are appropriate to the context.

    This is the point of view from which it is said that normal

economic action is that which may be expected in the long run

under certain conditions (provided those conditions are

persistent) from the members of an industrial group. It is normal

that bricklayers in most parts of England are willing to work for

10d. an hour, but refuse to work for 7 d. In Johannesburg it may

be normal that a bricklayer should refuse work at much less than

? a day. The normal price of bona fide fresh laid eggs may be

taken to be a penny when nothing is said as to the time of the

year: and yet threepence may be the normal price in town during

January; and twopence may be an abnormally low price then, caused

by "unseasonable" warmth.

    Another misunderstanding to be guarded against arises from

the notion that only those economic results are normal, which are

due to the undisturbed action of free competition. But the term

has often to be applied to conditions in which perfectly free

competition does not exist, and can hardly even be supposed to

exist; and even where free competition is most dominant, the

normal conditions of every facet and tendency will include vital

elements that are not a part of competition nor even akin to it.

Thus, for instance, the normal arrangement of many transactions

in retail and wholesale trade, and on Stock and Cotton Exchanges,

rests on the assumption that verbal contracts, made without

witnesses, will be honourably discharged; and in countries in

which this assumption cannot legitimately be made, some parts of

the Western doctrine of normal value are inapplicable. Again, the

prices of various Stock Exchange securities are affected

"normally" by the patriotic feelings not only of the ordinary

purchasers, but of the brokers themselves: and so on.

    Lastly it is sometimes erroneously supposed that normal

action in economics is that which is right morally. But that is

to be understood only when the context implies that the action is

being judged from the ethical point of view. When we are

considering the facts of the world, as they are, and not as they

ought to be, we shall have to regard as "normal" to the

circumstances in view, much action which we should use our utmost

efforts to stop. For instance, the normal condition of many of

the very poorest inhabitants of a large town is to be devoid of

enterprise, and unwilling to avail themselves of the

opportunities that may offer for a healthier and less squalid

life elsewhere; they have not the strength, physical, mental and

moral, required for working their way out of their miserable

surroundings. The existence of a considerable supply of labour

ready to make match-boxes at a very low rate is normal in the

same way that a contortion of the limbs is a normal result of

taking strychnine. It is one result, a deplorable result, of

those tendencies the laws of which we have to study. This

illustrates one peculiarity which economics shares with a few

other sciences, the nature of the material of which can be

modified by human effort. Science may suggest a moral or

practical precept to modify that nature and thus modify the

action of laws of nature. For instance, economics may suggest

practical means of substituting capable workers for those who can

only do such work as match-box making; as physiology may suggest

measures for so modifying the breeds of cattle that they mature

early, and carry much flesh on light frames. The laws of the

fluctuation of credit and prices have been much altered by

increased powers of prediction.

    Again when "normal" prices are contrasted with temporary or

market prices, the term refers to the dominance in the long run

of certain tendencies under given conditions. But this raises

some difficult questions which may be postponed.(3*)

    5. It is sometimes said that the laws of economics are

"hypothetical". Of course, like every other science, it

undertakes to study the effects which will be produced by certain

causes, not absolutely, but subject to the condition that other

things are equal, and that the causes are able to work out their

effects undisturbed. Almost every scientific doctrine, when

carefully and formally stated, will be found to contain some

proviso to the effect that other things are equal: the action of

the causes in question is supposed to be isolated; certain

effects are attributed to them, but only on the hypothesis that

no cause is permitted to enter except those distinctly allowed

for. It is true however that the condition that time must be

allowed for causes to produce their effects is a source of great

difficulty in economics. For meanwhile the material on which they

work, and perhaps even the causes themselves, may have changed;

and the tendencies which are being described will not have a

sufficiently "long run" in which to work themselves out fully.

This difficulty will occupy our attention later on.

    The conditioning clauses implied in a law are not continually

repeated, but the common sense of the reader supplies them for

himself. In economics it is necessary to repeat them oftener than

elsewhere, because its doctrines are more apt than those of any

other science to be quoted by persons who have had no scientific

training, and who perhaps have heard them only at second hand,

and without their context. One reason why ordinary conversation

is simpler in form than a scientific treatise, is that in

conversation we can safely omit conditioning clauses; because, if

the hearer does not supply them for himself, we quickly detect

the misunderstanding, and set it right. Adam Smith and many of

the earlier writers on economics attained seeming simplicity by

following the usages of conversation, and omitting conditioning

clauses. But this has caused them to be constantly misunderstood,

and has led to much waste of time and trouble in profitless

controversy; they purchased apparent ease at too great a cost

even for that gain.(4*)

    Though economic analysis and general reasoning are of wide

application, yet every age and every country has its own

problems; and every change in social conditions is likely to

require a new development of economic doctrines.(5*)



NOTES:



1. Schmoller in the article on Folkswirschaft in Conrad's

Handworterbuch.



2. The relation of "natural and economic laws", is exhaustively

discussed by Neumann (Zeitschrift fur die gesamte

Staatswissenschaft, 1892) who concludes (p. 464) that there is no

other word than Law (Gesetz) to express those statements of

tendency, which play so important a part in natural as well as

economic science. See also Wagner (Grundlegung, 86-91).



3. They are discussed in Book V, especially chapters III and V.



4. Compare Book II, chapter I.



5. Some parts of economics are relatively abstract or pure,

because they are concerned mainly with broad general

propositions: for, in order that a proposition may be of broad

application it must necessarily contain few details: it cannot

adapt itself to particular cases; and if it points to any

prediction, that must be governed by a strong conditioning clause

in which a very large meaning is given to the phrase "other

things being equal." Other parts are relatively applied, because

they deal with narrower questions more in detail; they take more

account of local and temporary elements; and they consider

economic conditions in fuller and closer relation to other

conditions of life. Thus there is but a short step from the

applied science of banking in its more general sense, to broad

rules or precepts of the general Art of banking: while the step

from a particular local problem of the applied science of banking

to the corresponding rule of practice or precept of Art may be

shorter still.



Chapter 4



The Order and Aims of Economic Studies



    1. We have seen that the economist must be greedy of facts;

but that facts by themselves teach nothing. History tells of

sequences and coincidences; but reason alone can interpret and

draw lessons from them. The work to be done is so various that

much of it must be left to be dealt with by trained common sense,

which is the ultimate arbiter in every practical problem.

Economic science is but the working of common sense aided by

appliances of organized analysis and general reasoning, which

facilitate the task of collecting, arranging, and drawing

inferences from particular facts. Though its scope is always

limited, though its work without the aid of common sense is vain,

yet it enables common sense to go further in difficult problems

than would otherwise be possible.

    Economic laws are statements with regard to the tendencies of

man's action under certain conditions. They are hypothetical only

in the same sense as are the laws of the physical sciences: for

those laws also contain or imply conditions. But there is more

difficulty in making the conditions clear, and more danger in any

failure to do so, in economics than in physics. The laws of human

action are not indeed as simple, as definite or as clearly

ascertainable as the law of gravitation; but many of them may

rank with the laws of those natural sciences which deal with

complex subject-matter.

    The raison d'etre of economics as a separate science is that

it deals chiefly with that part of man's action which is most

under the control of measurable motives; and which therefore

lends itself better than any other to systematic reasoning and

analysis. We cannot indeed measure motives of any kind, whether

high or low, as they are in themselves: we can measure only their

moving force. Money is never a perfect measure of that force; and

it is not even a tolerably good measure unless careful account is

taken of the general conditions under which it works, and

especially of the riches or poverty of those whose action is

under discussion. But with careful precautions money affords a

fairly good measure of the moving force of a great part of the

motives by which men's lives are fashioned.

    The study of theory must go hand in hand with that of facts:

and for dealing with most modern problems it is modern facts that

are of the greatest use. For the economic records of the distant

past are in some respects slight and untrustworthy; and the

economic conditions of early times are wholly unlike those of the

modern age of free enterprise, of general education, of true

democracy, of steam, of the cheap press and the telegraph.

    2. Economics has then as its purpose firstly to acquire

knowledge for its own sake, and secondly to throw light on

practical issues. But though we are bound, before entering on any

study, to consider carefully what are its uses, we should not

plan out our work with direct reference to them. For by so doing

we are tempted to break off each line of thought as soon as it

ceases to have an immediate bearing on that particular aim which

we have in view at the time: the direct pursuit of practical aims

leads us to group together bits of all sorts of knowledge, which

have no connection with one another except for the immediate

purposes of the moment; and which throw but little light on one

another. Our mental energy is spent in going from one to another;

nothing is thoroughly thought out; no real progress is made.

    The best grouping, therefore, for the purposes of science is

that which collects together all those facts and reasonings which

are similar to one another in nature: so that the study of each

may throw light on its neighbour. By working thus for a long time

at one set of considerations, we get gradually nearer to those

fundamental unities which are called nature's laws: we trace

their action first singly, and then in combination; and thus make

progress slowly but surely. The practical uses of economic

studies should never be out of the mind of the economist, but his

special business is to study and interpret facts and to find out

what are the effects of different causes acting singly and in

combination.

    3. This may be illustrated by enumerating some of the chief

questions to which the economist addresses himself. He inquires:

    What are the causes which, especially in the modern world,

affect the consumption and production, the distribution and

exchange of wealth; the organization of industry and trade; the

money market; wholesale and retail dealing; foreign trade, and

the relations between employers and employed? How do all these

movements act and react upon one another? How do their ultimate

differ from their immediate tendencies?

    Subject to what limitations is the price of anything a

measure of its desirability? What increase of wellbeing is prima

facie likely to result from a given increase in the wealth of any

class of society? How far is the industrial efficiency of any

class impaired by the insufficiency of its income? How far would

an increase of the income of any class, if once effected, be

likely to sustain itself through its effects in increasing their

efficiency and earning power?

    How far does, as a matter of fact, the influence of economic

freedom reach (or how far has it reached at any particular time)

in any place, in any rank of society, or in any particular branch

of industry? What other influences are most powerful there; and

how is the action of all these influences combined? In

particular, how far does economic freedom tend of its own action

to build up combinations and monopolies, and what are their

effects? How are the various classes of society likely to be

affected by its action in the long run; what will be the

intermediate effects while its ultimate results are being worked

out; and, account being taken of the time over which they will

spread, what is the relative importance of these two classes of

ultimate and intermediate effects? What will be the incidence of

any system of taxes? What burdens will it impose on the

community, and what revenue will it afford to the State?

    4. The above are the main questions with which economic

science has to deal directly, and with reference to which its

main work of collecting facts, of analysing them and reasoning

about them should be arranged. The practical issues which, though

lying for the greater part outside the range of economic science,

yet supply a chief motive in the background to the work of the

economist, vary from time to time, and from place to place, even

more than do the economic facts and conditions which form the

material of his studies. The following problems seem to be of

special urgency now in our own country. --

    How should we act so as to increase the good and diminish the

evil influences of economic freedom, both in its ultimate results

and in the course of its progress? If the first are good and the

latter evil, but those who suffer the evil, do not reap the good;

how far is it right that they should suffer for the benefit of

others?

    Taking it for granted that a more equal distribution of

wealth is to be desired, how far would this justify changes in

the institutions of property, or limitations of free enterprise

even when they would be likely to diminish the aggregate of

wealth? In other words, how far should an increase in the income

of the poorer classes and a diminution of their work be aimed at,

even if it involved some lessening of national material wealth?

How far could this be done without injustice, and without

slackening the energies of the leaders of progress? How ought the

burdens of taxation to be distributed among the different classes

of society?

    Ought we to rest content with the existing forms of division

of labour? Is it necessary that large numbers of the people

should be exclusively occupied with work that has no elevating

character? Is it possible to educate gradually among the great

mass of workers a new capacity for the higher kinds of work; and

in particular for undertaking co-operatively the management of

the business in which they are themselves employed?

    What are the proper relations of individual and collective

action in a stage of civilization such as ours? How far ought

voluntary association in its various forms, old and new, to be

left to supply collective action for those purposes for which

such action has special advantages? What business affairs should

be undertaken by society itself acting through its government,

imperial or local? Have we, for instance, carried as far as we

should the plan of collective ownership and use of open spaces,

of works of art, of the means of instruction and amusement, as

well as of those material requisites of a civilized life, the

supply of which requires united action, such as gas and water,

and railways?

    When government does not itself directly intervene, how far

should it allow individuals and corporations to conduct their own

affairs as they please? How far should it regulate the management

of railways and other concerns which are to some extent in a

position of monopoly, and again of land and other things the

quantity of which cannot be increased by man? Is it necessary to

retain in their full force all the existing rights of property;

or have the original necessities for which they were meant to

provide, in some measure passed away?

    Are the prevailing methods of using wealth entirely

justifiable? What scope is there for the moral pressure of social

opinion in constraining and directing individual action in those

economic relations in which the rigidity and violence of

government interference would be likely to do more harm than

good? In what respect do the duties of one nation to another in

economic matters differ from those of members of the same nation

to one another?



    Economics is thus taken to mean a study of the economic

aspects and conditions of man's political, social and private

life; but more especially of his social life. The aims of the

study are to gain knowledge for its own sake, and to obtain

guidance in the practical conduct of life, and especially of

social life. The need for such guidance was never so urgent as

now; a later generation may have more abundant leisure than we

for researches that throw light on obscure points in abstract

speculation, or in the history of past times, but do not afford

immediate aid in present difficulties.

    But though thus largely directed by practical needs,

economics avoids as far as possible the discussion of those

exigencies of party organization, and those diplomacies of home

and foreign politics of which the statesman is bound to take

account in deciding what measures that he can propose will bring

him nearest to the end that he desires to secure for his country.

It aims indeed at helping him to determine not only what that end

should be, but also what are the best methods of a broad policy

devoted to that end. But it shuns many political issues, which

the practical man cannot ignore: and it is therefore a science,

pure and applied, rather than a science and an art. And it is

better described by the broad term " Economics ', than by the

narrower term " Political Economy ".

    5. The economist needs the three great intellectual

faculties, perception, imaginAtion and reason: and most of all he

needs imagination, to put him on the track of those causes of

visible events which are remote or lie below the surface, and of

those effects of visible causes which are remote or lie below the

surface.

    The natural sciences and especially the physical group of

them have this great advantage as a discipline over all studies

of man's action, that in them the investigator is called on for

exact conclusions which can be verified by subsequent observation

or experiment. His fault is soon detected if he contents himself

with such causes and such effects as lie on the surface; or again

if he ignores the mutual interaction of the forces of nature,

wherein every movement modifies and is modified by all that

surround it. Nor does the thorough student of physics rest

satisfied with a mere general analysis; he is ever striving to

make it quantitative; and to assign its proper proportion to each

element in his problem.

    In sciences that relate to man exactness is less attainable.

The path of least resistance is sometimes the only one open: it

is always alluring; and though it is also always treacherous, the

temptation is great to follow it even when a more through way can

be fought out by resolute work. The scientific student of history

is hampered by his inability to experiment and even more by the

absence of any objective standard to which his estimates of

relative proportion can be referred. Such estimates are latent in

almost every stage of his argument: he cannot conclude that one

cause or group of causes has been overridden by another without

making some implicit estimate of their relative weights. And yet

it is only by a great effort that he perceives how dependent he

is on his own subjective impressions. The economist also is

hampered by this difficulty, but in a less degree than other

students of man's action; for indeed he has some share in those

advantages which give precision and objectivity to the work of

the physicist. So long, at all events, as he is concerned with

current and recent events, many of his facts group themselves

under classes as to which statements can be made that are

definite, and often were approximately accurate numerically: and

thus he is at some advantage in seeking for causes and for

results which lie below the surface, and are not easily seen; and

in analyzing complex conditions into their elements and in

reconstructing a whole out of many elements.

    In smaller matters, indeed, simple experience will suggest

the unseen. It will, for instance, put people in the way of

looking for the harm to strength of character and to family life

that comes from ill-considered aid to the thriftless; even though

what is seen on the surface is almost sheer gain. But greater

effort, a larger range of view, a more powerful exercise of the

imagination are needed in tracking the true results of, for

instance, many plausible schemes for increasing steadiness of

employment. For that purpose it is necessary to have learnt how

closely connected are changes in credit, in domestic trade, in

foreign trade competition, in harvests, in prices; and how all of

these affect steadiness of employment for good and for evil. It

is necessary to watch how almost every considerable economic

event in any part of the Western world affects employment in some

trades at least in almost every other part. If we deal only with

those causes of unemployment which are near at hand, we are

likely to make no good cure of the evils we see; and we are

likely to cause evils, that we do not see. And if we are to look

for those which are far off and weigh them in the balance, then

the work before us is a high discipline for the mind.

    Again, when by a "standard rule" or any other device wages

are kept specially high in any trade, imagination set a-going

will try to track the lives of those who are prevented by the

standard rule from doing work, of which they are capable, at a

price that people are willing to pay for it. Are they pushed up,

or are they pushed down? If some are pushed up and some pushed

down, as commonly happens, is it the many that are pushed up and

the few that are pushed down, or the other way about? If we look

at surface results, we may suppose that it is the many who are

pushed up. But if, by the scientific use of the imagination, we

think out all the ways in which prohibitions, whether on Trade

Union authority or any other, prevent people from doing their

best and earning their best, we shall often conclude that it is

the many who have been pushed down, and the few who have been

pushed up. Partly under English influence, some Australasian

colonies are making bold ventures, which hold out specious

promise of greater immediate comfort and ease to the workers.

Australasia has indeed a great reserve of borrowing power in her

vast landed property: and should the proposed short cuts issue in

some industrial decadence, the fall may be slight and temporary.

But it is already being urged that England should move on similar

lines: and a fall for her would be more serious. What is needed,

and what we may hope is coming in the near future, is a larger

study of such schemes of the same kind and by the same order of

minds as are applied to judging a new design for a battleship

with reference to her stability in bad weather.

    In such problems as this it is the purely intellectual, and

sometimes even the critical faculties, which are most in demand.

But economic studies call for and develop the faculty of

sympathy, and especially that rare sympathy which enables people

to put themselves in the place, not only of their comrades, but

also of other classes. This class sympathy is, for instance,

strongly developed by inquiries, which are becoming every day

more urgent, of the reciprocal influences which character and

earnings, methods of employment and habits of expenditure exert

on one another; of the ways in which the efficiency of a nation

is strengthened by and strengthens the confidences and affections

which hold together the members of each economic group - the

family, employers and employees in the same business, citizens of

the same country; of the good and evil that are mingled in the

individual unselfishness and the class selfishness of

professional etiquette and of trade union customs; and of

movements by which our growing wealth and opportunities may best

be turned to account for the wellbeing of the present and coming

generations.(1*)

    6. The economist needs imagination especially in order that

he may develop his ideals. But most of all he needs caution and

reserve in order that his advocacy of ideals may not outrun his

grasp of the future.

    After many more generations have passed, our present ideals

and methods may seem to belong to the infancy, rather than to the

maturity of man. One definite advance has already been made. We

have learnt that every one until proved to be hopelessly weak or

base is worthy of full economic freedom: but we are not in a

position to guess confidently to what goal the advance thus begun

will ultimately lead. In the later Middle Ages a rough beginning

was made of the study of the industrial organism, regarded as

embracing all humanity. Each successive generation has seen

further growths of that organism; but none has seen so large a

growth as our own. The eagerness with which it has been studied

has grown with its growth; and no parallel can be found in

earlier times to the breadth and variety of the efforts that have

been made to comprehend it. But the chief outcome of recent

studies is to make us recognize more fully, than could be done by

any previous generation, how little we know of the causes by

which progress is being fashioned, and how little we can forecast

the ultimate destiny of the industrial organism.

    Some harsh employers and politicians, defending exclusive

class privileges early in last century, found it convenient to

claim the authority of political economy on their side; and they

often spoke of themselves as "economists." And even in our own

time, that title has been assumed by opponents of generous

expenditure on the education of the masses of the people, in

spite of the fact that living economists with one consent

maintain that such expenditure is a true economy, and that to

refuse it is both wrong and bad business from a national point of

view. But Carlyle and Ruskin, followed by many other writers who

had no part in their brilliant and ennobling poetical visions,

have without examination held the great economists responsible

for sayings and deeds to which they were really averse; and in

consequence there has grown up a popular misconception of their

thoughts and character.

    The fact is that nearly all the founders of modern economics

were men of gentle and sympathetic temper, touched with the

enthusiasm of humanity. They cared little for wealth for

themselves; they cared much for its wide diffusion among the

masses of the people. They opposed antisocial monopolies however

powerful. In their several generations they supported the

movement against the class legislation which denied to trade

unions privileges that were open to associations of employers; or

they worked for a remedy against the poison which the old Poor

Law was instilling into the hearts and homes of the agricultural

and other labourers; or they supported the factory acts, in spite

of the strenuous opposition of some politicians and employers who

claimed to speak in their name. They were without exception

devoted to the doctrine that the wellbeing of the whole people

should be the ultimate goal of all private effort and all public

policy. But they were strong in courage and caution; they

appeared cold, because they would not assume the responsibility

of advocating rapid advances on untried paths, for the safety of

which the only guarantees offered were the confident hopes of men

whose imaginations were eager, but not steadied by knowledge nor

disciplined by hard thought.

    Their caution was perhaps a little greater than necessary:

for the range of vision even of the great seers of that age was

in some respects narrower than is that of most educated men in

the present time; when, partly through the suggestions of

biological study, the influence of circumstances in fashioning

character is generally recognized as the dominant fact in social

science. Economists have accordingly now learnt to take a larger

and more hopeful view of the possibilities of human progress.

They have learnt to trust that the human will, guided by careful

thought, can so modify circumstances as largely to modify

character; and thus to bring about new conditions of life still

more favourable to character; and therefore to the economic, as

well as the moral, wellbeing of the masses of the people. Now as

ever it is their duty to oppose all plausible short cuts to that

great end, which would sap the springs of energy and initiative.

    The rights of property, as such, have not been venerated by

those master minds who have built up economic science; but the

authority of the science has been wrongly assumed: by some who

have pushed the claims of vested rights to extreme and antisocial

uses. It may be well therefore to note that the tendency of

careful economic study is to base the rights of private property

not on any abstract principle, but on the observation that in the

past they have been inseparable from solid progress; and that

therefore it is the part of responsible men to proceed cautiously

and tentatively in abrogating or modifying even such rights as

may seem to be inappropriate to the ideal conditions of social

life.



NOTES:



1. This Section is reproduced from a Plea for the creation of a

curriculum in economics and associated branches of political

science addressed to the University of Cambridge in 1902, and

conceded in the following year.


