







Book IV





The Agents of Production





Land, Labour, and Capital and Organization








Chapter 1





Introductory





    1. The agents of production are commonly classed as Land,


Labour and Capital. By Land is meant the material and the forces


which Nature gives freely for man's aid, in land and water, in


air and light and heat. By Labour is meant: the economic work of


man, whether with the hand or the head.(1*) By Capital is meant


all stored-up provision for the production of material goods, and


for the attainment of those benefits which are commonly reckoned


as part of income. It is the main stock of wealth regarded as an


agent of production rather than as a direct source of


gratification.


    Capital consists in a great part of knowledge and


organization: and of this some part is private property and other


part is not. Knowledge is our most powerful engine of production;


it enables us to subdue Nature and force her to satisfy our


wants. Organization aids knowledge; it has many forms, e.g. that


of a single business, that of various businesses in the same


trade, that of various trades relatively to one another, and that


of the State providing security for all and help for many. The


distinction between public and private property in knowledge and


organization is of great and growing importance: in some respects


of more importance than that between public and private property


in material things; and partly for that reason it seems best


sometimes to reckon Organization apart as a distinct agent of


production. It cannot be fully examined till a much later stage


in our inquiry; but something has to be said of it in the present


Book.


    In a sense there are only two agents of production, nature


and man. Capital and organization are the result of the work of


man aided by nature, and directed by his power of forecasting the


future and his willingness to make provision for it. If the


character and powers of nature and of man be given, the growth of


wealth and knowledge and organization follow from them as effect


from cause. But on the other hand man is himself largely formed


by his surroundings, in which nature plays a great part: and thus


from every point of view man is the centre of the problem of


production as well as that of consumption; and also of that


further problem of the relations between the two, which goes by


the twofold name of Distribution and Exchange.


    The growth of mankind in numbers, in health and strength, in


knowledge, ability, and in richness of character is the end of


all our studies: but it is an aim to which economics can do no


more than contribute some important elements. In its broader


aspects therefore the study of this growth belongs to the end, if


to any part of a treatise on economics: but does not properly


belong even there. Meanwhile we cannot avoid taking account of


the direct agency of man in production, and of the conditions


which govern his efficiency as a producer. And on the whole it is


perhaps the most convenient course, as it certainly is that most


in accordance with English tradition, to include some account of


the growth of population in numbers and character as a part of


the general discussion of production.


    2. It is not possible at this stage to do more than indicate


very slightly the general relations between demand and supply,


between consumption and production. But it may be well, while the


discussion of utility and value is fresh in our minds, to take a


short glance at the relations between value and the disutility or


discommodity that has to be overcome in order to obtain those


goods which have value because they are at once desirable and


difficult of attainment. All that can be said now must be


provisional; and may even seem rather to raise difficulties than


to solve them: and there will be an advantage in having before us


a map, in however slight and broken outline, of the ground to be


covered.


    While demand is based on the desire to obtain commodities,


supply depends mainly on the overcoming of the unwillingness to


undergo "discommodities." These fall generally under two heads:


-- labour, and the sacrifice involved in putting off consumption.


It must suffice here to give a sketch of the part played by


ordinary labour in supply. It will be seen hereafter that remarks


similar, though not quite the same, might have been made about


the work of management and the sacrifice which is involved


(sometimes, but not always) in that waiting which is involved in


accumulating the means of production.


    The discommodity of labour may arise from bodily or mental


fatigue, or from its being carried on in unhealthy surroundings,


or with unwelcome associates, or from its occupying time that is


wanted for recreation, or for social or intellectual pursuits.


But whatever be the form of the discommodity, its intensity


nearly always increases with the severity and the duration of


labour. Of course much exertion is undergone for its own sake, as


for instance in mountaineering, in playing games and in the


pursuit of literature, of art, and of science; and much hard work


is done under the influence of a desire to benefit others.(2*)


But the chief motive to most labour, in our use of the term, is


the desire to obtain some material advantage; which in the


present state of the world appears generally in the form of the


gain of a certain amount of money. It is true that even when a


man is working for hire he often finds pleasure in his work: but


he generally gets so far tired before it is done that he is glad


when the hour for stopping arrives. Perhaps after he has been out


of work for some time, he might, as far as his immediate comfort


is concerned, rather work for nothing than not work at all; but


he will probably prefer not to spoil his market, any more than a


manufacturer would, by offering what he has for sale much below


its normal price. On this matter much will need to be said in


another volume.


    In technical phrase this may be called the marginal


disutility of labour. For, as with every increase in the amount


of a commodity its marginal utility falls; and as with every fall


in that desirableness, there is a fall in the price that can be


got for the whole of the commodity, and not for the last part


only; so the marginal disutility of labour generally increases,


with every increase in its amount.


    The unwillingness of anyone already in an occupation to


increase his exertions depends, under ordinary circumstances, on


fundamental principles of human nature which economists have to


accept as ultimate facts. As Jevons remarks,(3*) there is often


some resistance to be overcome before setting to work. Some


little painful effort is often involved at starting; but this


gradually diminishes to zero, and is succeeded by pleasure; which


increases for a while until it attains a certain low maximum.


after which it diminishes to zero, and is succeeded by increasing


weariness and craving for relaxation and change. In intellectual


work, however, the pleasure and excitement, after they have once


set in, often go on increasing till progress is stopped of


necessity or by prudence. Everyone in health has a certain store


of energy on which he can draw, but which can only be replaced by


rest; so that if his expenditure exceed his income for long, his


health becomes bankrupt; and employers often find that in cases


of great need a temporary increase of pay will induce their


workmen to do an amount of work which they cannot long keep up,


whatever they are paid for it. One reason of this is that the


need for relaxation becomes more urgent with every increase in


the hours of labour beyond a certain limit. The disagreeableness


of additional work increases; partly because, as the time left


for rest and other activities diminishes, the agreeableness of


additional free time increases.


    Subject to these and some other qualifications, it is broadly


true that the exertions which any set of workers will make, rise


or fall with a rise or fall in the remuneration which is offered


to them. As the price required to attract purchasers for any


given amount of a commodity, was called the demand price for that


amount during a year or any other given time; so the price


required to call forth the exertion necessary for producing any


given amount of a commodity, may be called the supply price for


that amount during the same time. And if for the moment we


assumed that production depended solely upon the exertions of a


certain number of workers, already in existence and trained for


their work, we should get a list of supply prices corresponding


to the list of demand prices which we have already considered.


This list would set forth theoretically in one column of figures


various amounts of exertion and therefore of production; and in a


parallel column the prices which must be paid to induce the


available workers to put forth these amounts of exertion.(4*)


    But this simple method of treating the supply of work of any


kind, and consequently the supply of goods made by that work,


assumes that the number of those who are qualified for it is


fixed; and that assumption can be made only for short periods of


time. The total numbers of the people change under the action of


many causes. Of these causes only some are economic; but among


them the average earnings of labour take a prominent place;


though their influence on the growth of numbers is fitful and


irregular.


    But the distribution of the population between different


trades is more subject to the influence of economic causes. In


the long run the supply of labour in any trade is adapted more or


less closely to the demand for it: thoughtful parents bring up


their children to the most advantageous occupations to which they


have access; that is to those that offer the best reward, in


wages and other advantages, in return for labour that is not too


severe in quantity or character, and for skill that is not too


hard to be acquired. This adjustment between demand and supply


can however never be perfect; fluctuations of demand may make it


much greater or much less for a while, even for many years, than


would have been just sufficient to induce parents to select for


their children that trade rather than some other of the same


class. Although therefore the reward to be had for any kind of


work at any time does stand in some relation to the difficulty of


acquiring the necessary skill combined with the exertion, the


disagreeableness, the waste of leisure, etc. involved in the work


itself; yet this correspondence is liable to great disturbances.


The study of these disturbances is a difficult task; and it will


occupy us much in later stages of our work. But the present Book


is mainly descriptive and raises few difficult problems.





NOTES:





1. Labour is classed as economic when it is "undergone partly or


wholly with a view to some good other than the pleasure directly


derived from it." See p. 65 and footnote. Such labour with the


head as does not tend directly or indirectly to promote material


production, as for instance the work of the schoolboy at his


tasks, is left out of account, so long as we are confining our


attention to production in the ordinary sense of the term. From


some points of view, but not from all, the phrase Land, Labour,


Capital would be more symmetrical if labour were interpreted to


mean the labourers, i.e. mankind. See Walras, Économie Politique


Pure, Leçon 17, and Prof. Fisher, Economic Journal, VI, p. 529.





2. We have seen (p. 124) that, if a person makes the whole of his


purchases at the price which he would be just willing to pay for


his last purchases, he gains a surplus of satisfaction on his


earlier purchases; since he gets them for less than he would have


paid rather than go without them. So, if the price paid to him


for doing any work is an adequate reward for that part which he


does most unwillingly; and if, as generally happens, the same


payment is given for that part of the work which he does less


unwillingly and at less real cost to himself; then from that part


he obtains a producer's surplus. Some difficulties connected with


this notion are considered in Appendix K.


    The labourer's unwillingness to sell his labour for less than


its normal price resembles the unwillingness of manufacturers to


spoil their market by pushing goods for sale at a low price; even


though, so far as the particular transaction is concerned, they


would rather take the low price than let their works stand idle.





3. Theory of Political Economy, Ch. V. This doctrine has been


emphasized and developed in much detail by Austrian and American


economists.





4. See above III, iii, section 4.








Chapter 2





The Fertility of Land








    1. The requisites of production are commonly spoken of as


land, labour and capital: those material things which owe their


usefulness to human labour being classed under capital, and those


which owe nothing to it being classed as land. The distinction is


obviously a loose one: for bricks are but pieces of earth


slightly worked up; and the soil of old settled countries has for


the greater part been worked over many times by man, and owes to


him its present form. There is however a scientific principle


underlying the distinction. While man has no power of creating


matter, he creates utilities by putting things into a useful


form;(1*) and the utilities made by him can be increased in


supply if there is an increased demand for them: they have a


supply price. But there are other utilities over the supply of


which he has no control; they are given as a fixed quantity by


nature and have therefore no supply price. The term "land" has


been extended by economists so as to include the permanent


sources of these utilities;(2*) whether they are found in land,


as the term is commonly used, or in seas and rivers, in sunshine


and rain, in winds and waterfalls.


    When we have inquired what it is that marks off land from


those material things which we regard as products of the land, we


shall find that the fundamental attribute of land is its


extension. The right to use a piece of land gives command over a


certain space -- a certain part of the earth's surface. The area


of the earth is fixed: the geometric relations in which any


particular part of it stands to other parts are fixed. Man has no


control over them; they are wholly unaffected by demand; they


have no cost of production, there is no supply price at which


they can be produced.


    The use of a certain area of the earth's surface is a primary


condition of anything that man can do; it gives him room for his


own actions, with the enjoyment of the heat and the light, the


air and the rain which nature assigns to that area; and it


determines his distance from, and in a great measure his


relations to, other things and other persons. We shall find that


it is this property of "land" which, though as yet insufficient


prominence has been given to it, is the ultimate cause of the


distinction which all writers on economics are compelled to make


between land and other things. It is the foundation of much that


is most interesting and most difficult in economic science.


    Some parts of the earth's surface contribute to production


chiefly by the services which they render to the navigator:


others are of chief value to the miner; others -- though this


selection is made by man rather than by nature -- to the builder.


But when the productiveness of land is spoken of our first


thoughts turn to its agricultural use.


    2. To the agriculturist an area of land is the means of


supporting a certain amount of vegetable, and perhaps ultimately


of animal, life. For this purpose the soil must have certain


mechanical and chemical qualities.


    Mechanically, it must be so far yielding that the fine roots


of plants can push their way freely in it; and yet it must be


firm enough to give them a good hold. It must not err as some


sandy soils do by affording water too free a passage: for then it


will often be dry, and the plant food will be washed away almost


as soon as it is formed in the soil or put into it. Nor must it


err, as stiff clays do, by not allowing the water a fairly free


passage. For constant supplies of fresh water, and of the air


that it brings with it in its journey through the soil, are


essential: they convert into plant food the minerals and gases


that otherwise would be useless or even poisonous. The action of


fresh air and water and of frosts are nature's tillage of the


soil; and even unaided they will in time make almost any part of


the earth' s surface fairly fertile if the soil that they form


can rest where it is, and is not torn away down-hill by rain and


torrents as soon as it is formed. But man gives great aid in this


mechanical preparation of the soil. The chief purpose of his


tillage is to help nature to enable the soil to hold plant roots


gently but firmly, and to enable the air and water to move about


freely in it. And farmyard manure subdivides clay soils and makes


them lighter and more open; while to sandy soils it gives a much


needed firmness of texture, and helps them, mechanically as well


as chemically, to hold the materials of plant food which would


otherwise be quickly washed out of them.


    Chemically the soil must have the inorganic elements that the


plant wants in a form palatable to it; and in some cases man can


make a great change with but little labour. For he can then turn


a barren into a very fertile soil by adding a small quantity of


just those things that are needed; using in most cases either


lime in some of its many forms, or those artificial manures which


modern chemical science has provided in great variety: and he is


now calling in the aid of bacteria to help him in this work.


    3. By all these means the fertility of the soil can be


brought under man's control. He can by sufficient labour make


almost any land bear large crops. He can prepare the soil


mechanically and chemically for whatever crops he intends to grow


next. He can adapt his crops to the nature of the soil and to one


another; selecting such a rotation that each will leave the land


in such a state, and at such a time of year, that it can be


worked up easily and without loss of time into a suitable seed


bed for the coming crop. He can even permanently alter the nature


of the soil by draining it, or by mixing with it other soil that


will supplement its deficiencies. Hitherto this has been done


only on a small scale; chalk and lime, clay and marl have been


but thinly spread over the fields; a completely new soil has


seldom been made except in gardens and other favoured spots. But


it is possible, and even as some think probable, that at some


future time the mechanical agencies used in making railways and


other great earthworks may be applied on a large scale to


creating a rich soil by mixing two poor soils with opposite


faults.


    All these changes are likely to be carried out more


extensively and thoroughly in the future than in the past. But


even now the greater part of the soil in cold countries owes much


of its character to human action; all that lies just below the


surface has in it a large element of capital, the produce of


man's past labour. Those free gifts of nature which Ricardo


classed as the "inherent" and "indestructible" properties of the


soil, have been largely modified; partly impoverished and partly


enriched by the work of many generations of men.


    But it is different with that which is above the surface.


Every acre has given to it by nature an annual income of heat and


light, of air and moisture; and over these man has but little


control. He may indeed alter the climate a little by extensive


drainage works or by planting forests, or cutting them down. But,


on the whole, the action of the sun and the wind and the rain are


an annuity fixed by nature for each plot of land. Ownership of


the land gives possession of this annuity: and it also gives the


space required for the life and action of vegetables and animals;


the value of this space being much affected by its geographical


position.


    We may then continue to use the ordinary distinction between


the original or inherent properties, which the land derives from


nature, and the artificial properties which it owes to human


action; provided we remember that the first include the


space-relations of the plot in question, and the annuity that


nature has given it of sunlight and air and rain; and that in


many cases these are the chief of the inherent properties of the


soil. It is chiefly from them that the ownership of agricultural


land derives its peculiar significance, and the Theory of Rent


its special character.


    4. But the question how far the fertility of any soil is due


to the original properties given to it by nature, and how far to


the changes in it made by man, cannot be fully discussed without


taking account of the kind of produce raised from it. Human


agency can do much more to promote the growth of some crops than


of others. At one end of the scale are forest trees; an oak well


planted and with plenty of room has very little to gain from


man's aid: there is no way of applying labour to it so as to


obtain any considerable return. Nearly the same may be said of


the grass on some rich river bottoms which are endowed with a


rich soil and good natural drainage; wild animals feeding off


this grass without man's care will farm it nearly as well as he


does; and much of the richest farm land in England (paying a rent


of ? an acre and upwards) would give to unaided nature almost as


great a return as is got from it now. Next comes land which,


though not quite so rich, is still kept in permanent pasture; and


after this comes arable land on which man does not trust to


nature's sowing, but prepares for each crop a seed bed to suit


its special wants, sows the seed himself and weeds away the


rivals to it. The seeds which he sows are selected for their


habit of quickly maturing and fully developing just those parts


which are most useful to him; and though the habit of making this


selection carefully is only quite modern, and is even now far


from general, yet the continued work of thousands of years has


given him plants that have but little resemblance to their wild


ancestors. Lastly, the kinds of produce which owe most to man's


labour and care are the choicer kinds of fruits, flowers and


vegetables, and of animals, particularly those which are used for


improving their own breeds. For while nature left to herself


would select those that are best able to take care of themselves


and their offspring, man selects those which will provide him


most quickly with the largest supplies of the things he most


wants; and many of the choicest products could not hold their own


at all without his care.


    Thus various then are the parts which man plays in aiding


nature to raise the different kinds of agricultural produce. In


each case he works on till the extra return got by extra capital


and labour has so far diminished that it will no longer


remunerate him for applying them. Where this limit is soon


reached he leaves nature to do nearly all the work; where his


share in the production has been great, it is because he has been


able to work far without reaching this limit. We are thus brought


to consider the law of diminishing return.


    It is important to note that the return to capital and labour


now under discussion is measured by the amount of the produce


raised independently of any changes that may meanwhile take place


in the exchange value or price of produce; such, for instance, as


might occur if a new railway had been made in the neighbourhood,


or the population of the county had increased much, while


agricultural produce could not be imported easily. Such changes


will be of vital importance when we come to draw inferences from


the law of diminishing return, and particularly when we discuss


the pressure of increasing population on the means of


subsistence. But they have no bearing on the law itself, because


that has to do not with the value of the produce raised, but only


with its amount.(3*)





NOTES:





1. See Book II, Chapter iii.





2. In Ricardo's famous phrase "the original and indestructible


powers of the soil." Von Thünen, in a noteworthy discussion of


the basis of the theory of rent, and of the positions which Adam


Smith and Ricardo took with regard to it, speaks of "Der Boden an


sich"; a phrase which unfortunately cannot be translated, but


which means the soil as it would be by itself, if not altered by


the action of man (Der Isolierte Staat, 1, i, 5).





3. But see the latter part of IV, iii, section 8; also IV, xiii,


section 2.





Chapter 3





The Fertility of Land, Continued, The Tendency to Diminishing


Return





    1. The law of or statement of tendency to Diminishing Return


may be provisionally worded thus:


    An increase in the capital and labour applied in the


cultivation of land causes in general a less than proportionate


increase in the amount of produce raised, unless it happens to


coincide with an improvement in the arts of agriculture.


    We learn from history and by observation that every


agriculturist in every age and clime desires to have the use of a


good deal of land; and that when he cannot get it freely, he will


pay for it, if he has the means. If he thought that he would get


as good results by applying all his capital and labour to a very


small piece, he would not pay for any but a very small piece.


    When land that requires no clearing is to be had for nothing,


everyone uses just that quantity which he thinks will give his


capital and labour the largest return. His cultivation is


"extensive," not "intensive." He does not aim at getting many


bushels of corn from any one acre, for then he would cultivate


only a few acres. His purpose is to get as large a total crop as


possible with a given expenditure of seed and labour; and


therefore he sows as many acres as he can manage to bring under a


light cultivation. Of course he may go too far: he may spread his


work over so large an area that he would gain by concentrating


his capital and labour on a smaller space; and under these


circumstances if he could get command over more capital and


labour so as to apply more to each acre, the land would give him


an Increasing Return; that is, an extra return larger in


proportion than it gives to his present expenditure. But if he


has made his calculations rightly, he is using just so much


ground as will give him the highest return; and he would lose by


concentrating his capital and labour on a smaller area. If he had


command over more capital and labour and were to apply more to


his present land, he would gain less than he would by taking up


more land; he would get a Diminishing Return, that is, an extra


return smaller in proportion than he gets for the last


applications of capital and labour that he now makes, provided of


course that there is meanwhile no perceptible improvement in his


agricultural skill. As his sons grow up they will have more


capital and labour to apply to land; and in order to avoid


obtaining a diminishing return, they will want to cultivate more


land. But perhaps by this time all the neighbouring land is


already taken up, and in order to get more they must buy it or


pay a rent for the use of it, or migrate where they can get it


for nothing.(1*)


    This tendency to a diminishing return was the cause of


Abraham's parting from Lot,(2*) and most of the migrations of


which history tells. And wherever the right to cultivate land is


much in request, we may be sure that the tendency to a


diminishing return is in full operation. Were it not for this


tendency every farmer could save nearly the whole of his rent by


giving up all but a small piece of his land, and bestowing all


his capital and labour on that. If all the capital and labour


which he would in that case apply to it, gave as good a return in


proportion as that which he now applies to it, he would get from


that plot as large a produce as he now gets from his whole farm;


and he would make a net gain of all his rent save that of the


little plot that he retained.


    It may be conceded that the ambition of farmers often leads


them to take more land than they can properly manage: and indeed


almost every great authority on agriculture from Arthur Young


downwards, has inveighed against this mistake. But when they tell


a farmer that he would gain by applying his capital and labour to


a smaller area, they do not necessarily mean that he would get a


larger gross produce. It is sufficient for their argument that


the saving in rent would more than counterbalance any probable


diminution of the total returns that he got from the land. If a


farmer pays a fourth of his produce as rent, he would gain by


concentrating his capital and labour on less land, provided the


extra capital and labour applied to each acre gave anything more


than three-fourths as good a return in proportion, as he got from


his earlier expenditure.


    Again, it may be granted that much land, even in a country as


advanced as England, is so unskilfully cultivated that it could


be made to give more than double its present gross produce if


twice the present capital and labour were applied to it


skilfully. Very likely those are right who maintain that if all


English farmers were as able, wise and energetic as the best are,


they might profitably apply twice the capital and labour that is


now applied. Assuming rent to be one-fourth of the present


produce, they might get seven hundredweight of produce for every


four that they now get: it is conceivable that with still more


improved methods they might get eight hundredweight, or even


more. But this does not prove that, as things are, further


capital and labour could obtain from land an increasing return.


The fact remains that, taking farmers as they are with the skill


and energy which they actually have, we find as the result of


universal observation that there is not open to them a short road


to riches by giving up a great part of their land, by


concentrating all their capital and labour on the remainder, and


saving for their own pockets the rent of all but that remainder.


The reason why they cannot do this is told in the law of


diminishing return; that return being measured, as has already


been said by its quantity, not its exchange value.


    We may now state distinctly the limitations which were


implied under the words "in general" in our provisional wording


of the law. The law is a statement of a tendency which may indeed


be held in check for a time by improvements in the arts of


production and by the fitful course of the development of the


full powers of the soil; but which must ultimately become


irresistible if the demand for produce should increase without


limit. Our final statement of the tendency may then be divided


into two parts, thus: --


    Although an improvement in the arts of agriculture may raise


the rate of return which land generally affords to any given


amount of capital and labour; and although the capital and labour


already applied to any piece of land may have been so inadequate


for the development of its full powers, that some further


expenditure on it even with the existing arts of agriculture


would give a more than proportionate return; yet these conditions


are rare in an old country: and, except when they are present,


the application of increased capital and labour to land will add


a less than proportionate amount to the produce raised, unless


there be meanwhile an increase in the skill of the individual


cultivator. Secondly, whatever may be the future developments of


the arts of agriculture, a continued increase in the application


of capital and labour to land must ultimately result in a


diminution of the extra produce which can be obtained by a given


extra amount of capital and labour.


    2. Making use of a term suggested by James Mill, we may


regard the capital and labour applied to land as consisting of


equal successive doses.(3*) As we have seen, the return to the


first few doses may perhaps be small and a greater number of


doses may get a larger proportionate return; the return to


successive doses may even in exceptional cases alternately rise


and fall. But our law states that sooner or later (it being


always supposed that there is meanwhile no change in the arts of


cultivation) a point will be reached after which all further


doses will obtain a less proportionate return than the preceding


doses. The dose is always a combined dose of labour and capital,


whether it is applied by a peasant owner working unaided on his


own land, or at the charges of a capitalist farmer who does no


manual labour himself. But in the latter case the main body of


the outlay presents itself in the form of money; and when


discussing the business economy of farming in relation to English


conditions, it is often convenient to consider the labour


converted at its market value into a money equivalent, and to


speak of doses of capital simply, rather than of doses of labour


and capital.


    The dose which only just remunerates the cultivator may be


said to be the marginal dose, and the return to it the marginal


return. If there happens to be in the neighbourhood land that is


cultivated but only just pays its expenses, and so gives no


surplus for rent we may suppose this dose applied to it. We can


then say that the dose applied to it is applied to land on the


margin of cultivation, and this way of speaking has the advantage


of simplicity. But it is not necessary for the argument to


suppose that there is any such land: what we want to fix our


minds on is the return to the marginal dose; whether it happens


to be applied to poor land or to rich does not matter; all that


is necessary is that it should be the last dose which can


profitably be applied to that land.(4*)


    When we speak of the marginal, or the "last" dose applied to


the land, we do not mean the last in time, we mean that dose


which is on the margin of profitable expenditure; that is, which


is applied so as just to give the ordinary returns to the capital


and labour of the cultivator, without affording any surplus. To


take a concrete instance, we may suppose a farmer to be thinking


of sending the hoers over a field once more; and after a little


hesitation he decides that it is worth his while, but only just


worth his while to do it. The dose of capital and labour spent on


doing it, is then the last dose in our present sense, though


there are many doses still to be applied in reaping the crop. Of


course the return to this last dose cannot be separated from the


others; but we ascribe to it all that part of the produce which


we believe would not have been produced if the farmer had decided


against the extra hoeing.(5*)


    Since the return to the dose on the margin of cultivation


just remunerates the cultivator, it follows that he will be just


remunerated for the whole of his capital and labour by as many


times the marginal return as he has applied doses in all.


Whatever he gets in excess of this is the surplus produce of the


land. This surplus is retained by the cultivator if he owns the


land himself.(6*)


    It is important to note that this description of the nature


of surplus produce is not a theory of rent: we shall not be ready


for that till a much later stage. All that can be said here, is


that this surplus produce may, under certain conditions, become


the rent which the owner of the land can exact from the tenant


for its use. But, as we shall see hereafter, the full rent of a


farm in an old country is made up of three elements: the first


being due to the value of the soil as it was made by nature; the


second to improvements made in it by man; and the third, which is


often the most important of all, to the growth of a dense and


rich population, and to facilities of communication by public


roads, railroads, etc. It is to be noted also that in an old


country it is impossible to discover what was the original state


of the land before it was first cultivated. The results of some


of man's work are for good and evil fixed in the land, and cannot


be distinguished from those of nature's work: the line of


division is blurred, and must be drawn more or less arbitrarily.


But for most purposes it is best to regard the first difficulties


of coping with nature as pretty well conquered before we begin to


reckon the farmer's cultivation. Thus the returns that we count


as due to the first doses of capital and labour are generally the


largest of all, and the tendency of the return to diminish shows


itself at once. Having English agriculture chiefly in view, we


may fairly take, as Ricardo did, this as the typical case.(7*)


    3. Let us next inquire on what depends the rate of diminution


or of increase of the returns to successive doses of capital and


labour. We have seen that there are great variations in the share


of the produce which man may claim as the additional result of


his own work over what unaided nature would have produced; and


that man's share is much larger with some crops and soils and


methods of cultivation than with others. Thus broadly speaking it


increases as we pass from forest to pasture land, from pasture to


arable, and from plough land to spade land; and this is because


the rate of diminution of the return is as a rule greatest in


forests, rather less in pasture, still less in arable land, and


least of all in spade land.    There is no absolute measure of


the richness or fertility of land. Even if there be no change in


the arts of production, a mere increase in the demand for produce


may invert the order in which two adjacent pieces of land rank as


regards fertility. The one which gives the smaller produce, when


both are uncultivated, or when the cultivation of both is equally


slight, may rise above the other and justly rank as the more


fertile when both are cultivated with equal thoroughness. In


other words, many of those lands which are the least fertile when


cultivation is merely extensive, become among the most fertile


when cultivation is intensive. For instance, self-drained pasture


land may give a return large in proportion to a very slight


expenditure of capital and labour, but a rapidly diminishing


return to further expenditure: as population increases it may


gradually become profitable to break up some of the pasture and


introduce a mixed cultivation of roots and grains and grasses;


and then the return to further doses of capital and labour may


diminish less quickly.


    Other land makes poor pasture, but will give more or less


liberal returns to a great deal of capital and labour applied in


tilling and in manuring it; its returns to the early doses are


not very high, but they diminish slowly. Again, other land is


marshy. It may, as did the fens of east England, produce little


but osiers and wild fowl. Or, as is the case in many tropical


districts, it may be prolific of vegetation, but so shrouded with


malaria that it is difficult for man to live there, and still


more to work there. In such cases the returns to capital and


labour are at first small, but as drainage progresses, they


increase; afterwards perhaps they again fall off.(8*)


    But when improvements of this kind have once been made, the


capital invested in the soil cannot be removed; the early history


of the cultivation is not repeated; and the produce due to


further applications of capital and labour shows a tendency to


diminishing return.(9*)


    Similar though less conspicuous changes may occur on land


already well cultivated. For instance, without being marshy, it


may be in need of a little drainage to take off the stagnant


water from it, and to enable fresh water and air to stream


through it. Or the subsoil may happen to be naturally richer than


the soil at the surface: or again, though not itself rich, it may


have just those properties in which the surface soil is


deficient, and then a thorough system of deep steam-ploughing may


permanently change the character of the land.


    Thus we need not suppose that when the return to extra


capital and labour has begun to diminish, it will always continue


to do so. Improvements in the arts of production may, it has


always been understood, raise generally the return which can be


got by any amount of capital and labour; but this is not what is


meant here. The point is that, independently of any increase in


his knowledge, and using only those methods with which he has


long been familiar, a farmer finding extra capital and labour at


his command, may sometimes obtain an increasing return even at a


late stage in his cultivation.(10*)


    It has been well said that as the strength of a chain is that


of its weakest link, so fertility is limited by that element in


which it is most deficient. Those who are in a hurry, will reject


a chain which has one or two very weak links, however strong the


rest may be: and prefer to it a much slighter chain that has no


flaw. But if there is heavy work to be done, and they have time


to make repairs, they will set the larger chain in order, and


then its strength will exceed that of the other. In this we find


the explanation of much that is apparently strange in


agricultural history.


    The first settlers in a new country generally avoid land


which does not lend itself to immediate cultivation. They are


often repelled by the very luxuriance of natural vegetation, if


it happens to be of a kind that they do not want. They do not


care to plough land that is at all heavy, however rich it might


become if thoroughly worked. They will have nothing to do with


water-logged land. They generally select light land which can


easily be worked with a double plough, and then they sow their


seed broadly, so that the plants when they grow up may have


plenty of light and air, and may collect their food from a wide


area.


    When America was first settled, many farming operations that


are now done by horse machinery were still done by hand; and


though now the farmers have a strong preference for flat prairie


land, free from stumps and stones, where their machines can work


easily and without risk, they had then no great objection to a


hill-side. Their crops were light in proportion to their acreage,


but heavy in proportion to the capital and labour expended in


raising them.


    We cannot then call one piece of land more fertile than


another until we know something about the skill and enterprise of


its cultivators, and the amount of capital and labour at their


disposal; and till we know whether the demand for produce is such


as to make intensive cultivation profitable with the resources at


their disposal. If it is, those lands will be the most fertile


which give the highest average returns to a large expenditure of


capital and labour; but if not, those will be the most fertile


which give the best returns to the first few doses. The term


fertility has no meaning except with reference to the special


circumstances of a particular time and place.


    But even when so limited there is some uncertainty as to the


usage of the term. Sometimes attention is directed chiefly to the


power which land has of giving adequate returns to intensive


cultivation and so bearing a large total produce per acre; and


sometimes to its power of yielding a large surplus produce or


rent, even though its gross produce is not very large: thus in


England now rich arable land is very fertile in the former sense,


rich meadow in the latter. For many purposes it does not matter


which of these senses of the term is understood: in the few cases


in which it does matter, an interpretation clause must be


supplied in the context.(11*)


    4. But further, the order of fertility of different soils is


liable to be changed by changes in the methods of cultivation and


in the relative values of different crops. Thus when at the end


of last century Mr Coke showed how to grow wheat well on light


soils by preparing the way with clover, they rose relatively to


clay soils; and now though they are still sometimes called from


old custom "poor", some of them have a higher value, and are


really more fertile, than much of the land that used to be


carefully cultivated while they were left in a state of nature.


    Again, the increasing demand in central Europe for wood to be


used as fuel and for building purposes, has raised the value of


the pine-covered mountain slopes relatively to almost every other


kind of land. But in England this rise has been prevented by the


substitution of coal for wood as fuel, and of iron for wood as a


material for ship-building, and lastly by England's special


facilities for importing wood. Again, the cultivation of rice and


jute often gives a very high value to lands that are too much


covered with water to bear most other crops. And again, since the


repeal of the Corn Laws the prices of meat and dairy produce have


risen in England relatively to that of corn. Those arable soils


that would grow rich forage crops in rotation with corn, rose


relatively to the cold clay soils; and permanent pasture


recovered part of that great fall in value relatively to arable


land, which had resulted from the growth of population.(12*)


    Independently of any change in the suitability of the


prevailing crops and methods of cultivation for special soils,


there is a constant tendency towards equality in the value of


different soils. In the absence of any special cause to the


contrary, the growth of population and wealth will make the


poorer soils gain on the richer. Land that was at one time


entirely neglected is made by much labour to raise rich crops;


its annual income of light and heat and air, is probably as good


as those of richer soils: while its faults can be much lessened


by labour.(13*)


    As there is no absolute standard for fertility, so there is


none of good cultivation. The best cultivation in the richest


parts of the Channel Islands, for instance, involves a lavish


expenditure of capital and labour on each acre: for they are near


good markets and have a monopoly of an equable and early climate.


If left to nature the land would not be very fertile, for though


it has many virtues, it has two weak links (being deficient in


phosphoric acid and potash). But, partly by the aid of the


abundant seaweed on its shores, these links can be strengthened,


and the chain thus becomes exceptionally strong. Intense, or as


it is ordinarily called in England "good" cultivation, will thus


raise ?00 worth of early potatoes from a single acre. But an


equal expenditure per acre by the farmer in Western America would


ruin him; relatively to his circumstances it would not be good,


but bad cultivation.


    5. Ricardo' s wording of the law of diminishing return was


inexact. It is however probable that the inaccuracy was due not


to careless thinking but only to careless writing. In any case he


would have been justified in thinking that these conditions were


not of great importance in the peculiar circumstances of England


at the time at which he wrote, and for the special purposes of


the particular practical problems he had in view. Of course he


could not anticipate the great series of inventions which were


about to open up new sources of supply, and, with the aid of free


trade, to revolutionize English agriculture; but the agricultural


history of England and other countries might have led him to lay


greater stress on the probability of a change.(14*)


    He stated that the first settlers in a new country invariably


chose the richest lands, and that as population increased, poorer


and poorer soils were gradually brought under cultivation,


speaking carelessly as though there were an absolute standard of


fertility. But as we have already seen, where land is free,


everyone chooses that which is best adapted for his own purpose,


and that which will give him, all things considered, the best


return for his capital and labour. He looks out, therefore, for


land that can be cultivated at once, and passes by land that has


any weak links in the chain of its elements of fertility, however


strong it may be in some other links. But besides having to avoid


malaria, he must think of his communication with his markets and


the base of his resources; and in some cases the need for


security against the attacks of enemies and wild beasts outweighs


all other considerations. It is therefore not to be expected that


the lands which were first chosen, should turn out always to be


those which ultimately come to be regarded as the most fertile.


Ricardo did not consider this point, and thus laid himself open


to attacks by Carey and others, which, though for the greater


part based on a misinterpretation of his position, have yet some


solid substance in them.


    The fact that, in new countries, soils which an English


farmer would regard as poor, are sometimes cultivated before


neighbouring soils which he would regard as rich, is not


inconsistent, as some foreign writers have supposed, with the


general tenor of Ricardo's doctrines. Its practical importance is


in relation to the conditions under which the growth of


population tends to cause increased pressure on the means of


subsistence: it shifts the centre of interest from the mere


amount of the farmer's produce to its exchange value in terms of


the things which the industrial population in his neighbourhood


will offer for it.(15*)


    6. Ricardo, and the economists of his time generally were too


hasty in deducing this inference from the law of diminishing


return; and they did not allow enough for the increase of


strength that comes from organization. But in fact every farmer


is aided by the presence of neighbours whether agriculturists or


townspeople.(16*) Even if most of them are engaged like himself


in agriculture, they gradually supply him with good roads, and


other means of communication: they give him a market in which he


can buy at reasonable terms what he wants, necessaries, comforts


and luxuries for himself and his family, and all the various


requisites for his farm work: they surround him with knowledge:


medical aid, instruction and amusement are brought to his door;


his mind becomes wider, and his efficiency is in many ways


increased. And if the neighbouring market town expands into a


large industrial centre, his gain is much greater. All his


produce is worth more; some things which he used to throw away


fetch a good price. He finds new openings in dairy farming and


market gardening, and with a larger range of produce he makes use


of rotations that keep his land always active without denuding it


of any one of the elements that are necessary for its fertility.


    Further, as we shall see later on, an increase of population


tends to develop the organization of trade and industry; and


therefore the law of diminishing return does not apply to the


total capital and labour spent in a district as sharply as to


that on a single farm. Even when cultivation has reached a stage


after which each successive dose applied to a field would get a


less return than the preceding dose, it may be possible for an


increase in the population to cause a more than proportional


increase in the means of subsistence. It is true that the evil


day is only deferred: but it is deferred. The growth of


population, if not checked by other causes, must ultimately be


checked by the difficulty of obtaining raw produce; but in spite


of the law of diminishing return, the pressure of population on


the means of subsistence may be restrained for a long time to


come by the opening up of new fields of supply, by the cheapening


of railway and steamship communication, and by the growth of


organization and knowledge.


    Against this must be set the growing difficulty of getting


fresh air and light, and in some cases fresh water, in densely


peopled places. The natural beauties of a place of fashionable


resort have a direct money value which cannot be overlooked; but


it requires some effort to realize the true value to men, women


and children of being able to stroll amid beautiful and varied


scenery.


    7. As has already been said the land in economic phrase


includes rivers and the sea. In river-fisheries, the extra return


to additional applications of capital and labour shows a rapid


diminution. As to the sea, opinions differ. Its volume is vast,


and fish are very prolific; and some think that a practically


unlimited supply can be drawn from the sea by man without


appreciably affecting the numbers that remain there; or in other


words, that the law of diminishing return scarcely applies at all


to sea-fisheries: while others think that experience shows a


falling-off in the productiveness of those fisheries that have


been vigorously worked, especially by steam trawlers. The


question is important, for the future population of the world


will be appreciably affected as regards both quantity and


quality, by the available supply of fish.


    The produce of mines again, among which may be reckoned


quarries and brickfields, is said to conform to the law of


diminishing return; but this statement is misleading. It is true


that we find continually increasing difficulty in obtaining a


further supply of minerals, except in so far as we obtain


increased power over nature's stores through improvements in the


arts of mining, and through better knowledge of the contents of


the earth's crust; and there is no doubt that, other things being


equal, the continued application of capital and labour to mines


will result in a diminishing rate of yield. But this yield is not


a net yield, like the return of which we speak in the law of


diminishing return. That return is part of a constantly recurring


income, while the produce of mines is merely a giving up of their


stored-up treasures. The produce of the field is something other


than the soil; for the field, properly cultivated, retains its


fertility. But the produce of the mine is part of the mine


itself.


    To put the same thing in another way, the supply of


agricultural produce and of fish is a perennial stream; mines are


as it were nature' s reservoir. The more nearly a reservoir is


exhausted, the greater is the labour of pumping from it; but if


one man could pump it out in ten days, ten men could pump it out


in one day: and when once empty, it would yield no more. So the


mines that are being opened this year might just as easily have


been opened many years ago: if the plans had been properly laid


in advance, and the requisite specialized capital and skill got


ready for the work, ten years' supply of coal might have been


raised in one year without any increased difficulty; and when a


vein had once given up its treasure, it could produce no more.


This difference is illustrated by the fact that the rent of a


mine is calculated on a different principle from that of a farm.


The farmer contracts to give back the land as rich as he found


it: a mining company cannot do this; and while the farmer's rent


is reckoned by the year, mining rent consists chiefly of


"royalties" which are levied in proportion to the stores that are


taken out of nature's storehouse.(17*)


    On the other hand, services which land renders to man, in


giving him space and light and air in which to live and work, do


conform strictly to the law of diminishing return. It is


advantageous to apply a constantly increasing capital to land


that has any special advantages of situation, natural or


acquired. Buildings tower up towards the sky; natural light and


ventilation are supplemented by artificial means, and the steam


lift reduces the disadvantages of the highest floors; and for


this expenditure there is a return of extra convenience, but it


is a diminishing return. However great the ground rent may be, a


limit is at last reached after which it is better to pay more


ground rent for a larger area than to go on piling up storey on


storey any further; just as the farmer finds that at last a stage


is reached at which more intensive cultivation will not pay its


expenses, and it is better to pay more rent for extra land, than


to face the diminution in the return which he would get by


applying more capital and labour to his old land.(18*) From this


it results that the theory of ground rents is substantially the


same as that of farm rents. This and similar facts will presently


enable us to simplify and extend the theory of value as given by


Ricardo and Mill.


    And what is true of building land is true of many other


things. If a manufacturer has, say, three planing machines there


is a certain amount of work which he can get out of them easily.


If he wants to get more work from them he must laboriously


economize every minute of their time during the ordinary hours,


and perhaps work overtime. Thus after they are once well


employed, every successive application of effort to them brings


him a diminishing return. At last the net return is so small that


he finds it cheaper to buy a fourth machine than to force so much


work out of his old machines: just as a farmer who has already


cultivated his land highly finds it cheaper to take in more land


than to force more produce from his present land. Indeed there


are points of view from which the income derived from machinery


partakes of the nature of rent: as will be shown in Book V.





 NOTE ON THE LAW OF DIMINISHING RETURN





    8. The elasticity of the notion of diminishing return cannot


be fully considered here; for it is but an important detail of


that large general problem of the economic distribution of


resources in the investment of capital, which is the pivot of the


main argument of Book V and indeed of a great part of the whole


Volume. But a few words about it seem now to be called for in


this place, because much stress has recently been laid on it


under the able and suggestive leadership of Professor


Carver.(19*)


    If a manufacturer expends an inappropriately large amount of


his resources on machinery, so that a considerable part of it is


habitually idle; or on buildings, so that a considerable part of


his space is not well filled; or on his office staff, so that he


has to employ some of them on work that it is not worth what it


costs; then his excessive expenditure in that particular


direction will not be as remunerative as his previous expenditure


had been: and it may be said to yield him a "diminishing return."


But this use of the phrase, though strictly correct is apt to


mislead unless used with caution. For when the tendency to a


diminishing return from increased labour and capital applied to


land is regarded as a special instance of the general tendency to


diminishing return from any agent of production, applied in


excessive proportion to the other agents, one is apt to take it


for granted that the supply of the other factors can be


increased. That is to say, one is apt to deny the existence of


that condition -- the fixedness of the whole stock of cultivable


land in an old country -- which was the main foundation of those


great classical discussions of the law of diminishing return,


which we have just been considering. Even the individual farmer


may not always be able to get an additional ten or fifty acres


adjoining his own farm, just when he wants them, save at a


prohibitive price. And in that respect land differs from most


other agents of production even from the individual point of


view. This difference may indeed be regarded as of little account


in regard to the individual farmer. But from the social point of


view, from the point of view of the following chapters on


population it is vital. Let us look into this.


    In every phase of any branch of production there is some


distribution of resources between various expenditures which


yields a better result than any other. The abler the man in


control of any business, the nearer he will approach to the


ideally perfect distribution; just as the abler the primitive


housewife in control of a family's stock of wool, the nearer she


will approach to an ideal distribution of wool between the


different needs of the family.(20*)


    If his business extends he will extend his uses of each


requisite of production in due proportion; but not, as has


sometimes been said, proportionately; for instance the proportion


of manual work to machine work, which would be appropriate in a


small furniture factory would not be appropriate in a large one.


If he makes the best possible apportionment of his resources, he


gets the greatest (marginal) return from each appliance of


production of which his business is capable. If he uses too much


of any one he gets a diminishing return from it; because the


others are not able to back it up properly. And this diminishing


return is analogous to that which a farmer obtains, when he


cultivates land so intensively that he obtains a diminishing


return from it. If the farmer can get more land at the same rent


as he has paid for the old, he will take more land, or else lie


open to the imputation of being a bad business man: and this


illustrates the fact that land from the point of view of the


individual cultivator is simply one form of capital.


    But when the older economists spoke of the Law of Diminishing


Return they were looking at the problems of agriculture not only


from the point of view of the individual cultivator but also from


that of the nation as a whole. Now if the nation as a whole finds


its stock of planing machines or ploughs inappropriately large or


inappropriately small, it can redistribute its resources. It can


obtain more of that in which it is deficient, while gradually


lessening its stock of such things as are superabundant: but it


cannot do that in regard to land: it can cultivate its land more


intensively, but it cannot get any more. And for that reason the


older economists rightly insisted that, from the social point of


view, land is not on exactly the same footing as those implements


of production which man can increase without limit.


    No doubt in a new country where there is an abundance of rich


land not yet brought under cultivation, this fixedness of the


total stock of land is not operative. American economists often


speak of the value, or rent, of land as varying with the land's


distance from good markets, because even now there is a great


deal rather than with its fertility; of rich land in their


country which is not fully cultivated. And in like manner they


lay but little stress on the fact that the diminishing return to


labour and capital in general applied to the land by discreet


farmers, in such a country as England, is not exactly on the same


footing as the diminishing return to an inappropriate investment


of their resources by indiscreet farmers or manufacturers in a


disproportionately large number of ploughs or planing machines.


    It is true that when the tendency to diminishing return is


generalized, the return is apt to be expressed in terms of value,


and not of quantity. It must however be conceded that the older


method of measuring return in terms of quantity often jostled


against the difficulty of rightly interpreting a dose of labour


and capital without the aid of a money measure: and that, though


helpful for a broad preliminary survey, it cannot be carried very


far.


    But even the recourse to money fails us, if we want to bring


to a common standard the productiveness of lands in distant times


or places; and we must then fall back on rough, and more or less


arbitrary modes of measurement, which make no aim at numerical


precision, but will yet suffice for the broader purposes of


history. We have to take account of the facts that there are


great variations in the relative amounts of labour and capital in


a dose: and that interest on capital is generally a much less


important item in backward than in advanced stages of


agriculture, in spite of the fact that the rate of interest is


generally much lower in the latter. For most purposes it is


probably best to take as a common standard a day's unskilled


labour of given efficiency: we thus regard the dose as made up of


so much labour of different kinds, and such charges for the use


and replacement of capital, as will together make up the value


of, say, ten days' such labour. the relative proportions of these


elements and their several values in terms of such labour being


fixed according to the special circumstances of each


problem.(21*)


    A similar difficulty is found in comparing the returns


obtained by labour and capital applied under different


circumstances. So long as the crops are of the same kind, the


quantity of one return can be measured off against that of


another: but, when they are of different kinds, they cannot be


compared till they are reduced to a common measure of value.


When, for instance, it is said that land would give better


returns to the capital and labour expended on it with one crop or


rotation of crops than with another, the statement must be


understood to hold only on the basis of the prices at the time.


In such a case we must take the whole period of rotation


together, assuming the land to be in the same condition at the


beginning and the end of the rotation; and counting on the one


hand all the labour and capital applied during the whole period,


and on the other the aggregate returns of all the crops.


    It must be remembered that the return due to a dose of labour


and capital is not here taken to include the value of the capital


itself. For instance, if part of the capital on a farm consists


of two-year-old oxen, then the returns to a year's labour and


capital will include not the full weight of these oxen at the end


of the year, but only the addition that has been made to it


during the year. Again, when a farmer is said to work with a


capital of ?0 to the acre, this includes the value of everything


that he has on the farm; but the total volume of the doses of


labour and capital applied to a farm during, say, a year, does


not include the whole value of the fixed capital, such as


machinery and horses, but only the value of their use after


allowing for interest, depreciation and repairs; though it does


include the whole value of the circulating capital, such as seed.


    The above is the method of measuring capital generally


adopted, and it is to be taken for granted if nothing is said to


the contrary; but another method is more suitable occasionally.


Sometimes it is convenient to speak as though all the capital


applied were circulating capital applied at the beginning of the


year or during it: and in that case everything that is on the


farm at the end of the year is part of the produce. Thus, young


cattle are regarded as a sort of raw material which is worked up


in the course of time into fat cattle ready for the butcher. The


farm implements may even be treated in the same way, their value


at the beginning of the year being taken as so much circulating


capital applied to the farm, and at the end of the year as so


much produce. This plan enables us to avoid a good deal of


repetition of conditioning clauses as to depreciation, etc., and


to save the use of words in many ways. It is often the best plan


for general reasonings of an abstract character, particularly if


they are expressed in a mathematical form.


    The law of diminishing return must have occupied thoughtful


men in every densely peopled country. It was first stated clearly


by Turgot (OEuvres, ed. Daire I, pp. 420-1), as Prof. Cannan has


shown; and its chief applications were developed by Ricardo.





NOTES:





1. Increasing return in the earlier stages arises partly from


economy of organization, similar to that which gives an advantage


to manufacture on a large scale. But it is also partly due to the


fact that where land is very slightly cultivated the farmer's


crops are apt to be smothered by nature's crop of weeds. The


relation between Diminishing and Increasing Return is discussed


further in the last chapter of this Book.





2. "The land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell


together: for their substance was great, so that they could not


dwell together." Genesis xiii, 6.





3. As to this term see the Note at the end of the Chapter.





4. Ricardo was well aware of this: though he did not emphasize it


enough. Those opponents of his doctrine who have supposed that it


has no application to places where all the land pays a rent, have


mistaken the nature of his argument.





5. An illustration from recorded experiments may help to make


clearer the notion of the return to a marginal dose of capital


and labour. The Arkansas experimental station (see The Times, 18


Nov. 1889) reported that four plots of an acre each were treated


exactly alike except in the matter of ploughing and harrowing,


with the following result: --





 Plot            Cultivation             Crop yields


                                        bushels per


                                            acre





  1             Ploughed once               16


  2             Ploughed once and


                    harrowed once           18 1/3


  3             Ploughed twice and


                    harrowed once           21 2/3


  4             Ploughed twice and


                    harrowed twice          23 1/4





    This would show that the dose of capital and labour applied


in harrowing a second time an acre which had already been


ploughed twice gave a return of 1 7/12 bushels. And if the value


of these bushels, after allowing for expenses of harvesting, etc.


just replaced that dose with profits, then that dose was a


marginal one; even though it was not the last in point of time,


since those spent on harvesting must needs come later.





6. Let us seek a graphical illustration. {Figure 11} It is to be


remembered that graphical illustrations are not proofs. They are


merely pictures corresponding very roughly to the main conditions


of certain real problems. They obtain clearness of outline, by


leaving out of account many considerations which vary from one


practical problem to another, and of which the farmer must take


full account in his own special case. If on any given field there


were expended a capital of ?0, a certain amount of produce would


be raised from it: a certain amount larger than the former would


be raised if there were expended on it a capital of ?1. The


difference between these two amounts may be regarded as the


produce due to the fifty-first pound; and if we suppose the


capital to be applied in successive doses of ? each we may speak


of this difference as the produce due to the fifty-first dose.


Let the doses be represented in order by successive equal


divisions of the line OD. Let there now be drawn from the


division of this line representing the fifty-first dose M, a line


MP at right angles to OD, in thickness equal to the length of one


of the divisions, and such that its length represents the amount


of the produce due to the fifty-first dose. Suppose this done for


each separate division up to that corresponding to the last dose


which it is found profitable to put on the land. Let this last


dose be the 110th at D, and DC the corresponding return that only


just remunerates the farmer. The extremities of such lines will


lie on a curve APC. The gross produce will be represented by the


sum of these lines: i.e., since the thickness of each line is


equal to the length of the division on which it stands, by the


area ODCA. Let CGH be drawn parallel to DO, cutting PM in G; then


MG is equal to CD; and since DC just remunerates the farmer for


one dose, MG will just remunerate him for another: and so for all


the portions of the thick vertical lines cut off between OD and


HC. Therefore the sum of these, that is, the area ODCH,


represents the share of the produce that is required to


remunerate him; while the remainder, AHGCPA, is the surplus


produce, which under certain conditions becomes the rent.





7. That is, we may substitute (fig. 11) the dotted line BA' for


BA and regard A' BPC as the typical curve for the return to


capital and labour applied in English agriculture. No doubt crops


of wheat and some other annuals cannot be raised at all without


some considerable labour. But natural grasses which sow


themselves will yield a good return of rough cattle to scarcely


any labour.


    It has already been noticed (Book iii, ch. iii, 1), the law


of diminishing return bears a close analogy to the law of demand.


The return which land gives to a dose of capital and labour may


be regarded as the price which land offers for that dose. Land's


return to capital and labour is, so to speak, her effective


demand for them: her return to any dose is her demand price for


that dose, and the list of returns that she will give to


successive doses may thus be regarded as her demand schedule: but


to avoid confusion we shall call it her "Return Schedule."


Corresponding to the case of the land in the text is that of a


man who may be willing to pay a larger proportionate price for a


paper that would cover the whole of the walls of his room than


for one that would go only half way; and then his demand schedule


would at one stage show an increase and not a diminution of


demand price for an increased quantity. But in the aggregate


demand of many individuals these unevennesses destroy one


another; so that the aggregate demand schedule of a group of


people always shows the demand price as falling steadily with


every increase in the amount offered. In the same way, by


grouping together many pieces of land we might obtain a return


schedule that would show a constant diminution for every increase


of capital and labour applied. But it is more easy to ascertain,


and in some ways more important to take note of, the variations


of individual demand in the case of plots of land than in the


case of people. And therefore our typical return schedule is not


drawn out so as to show as even and uniform a diminution of


return as our typical demand schedule does of demand price.


8. This case may be represented by diagrams. If the produce rises


in real value in the ratio of OH' to OH (so that the amount


required to remunerate the farmer for a dose of capital and


labour has fallen from OH to OH'), the surplus produce rises only


to AH'C', which is not very much greater than its old amount AHC,


fig. 12, representing the first case. The second case is


represented in fig. 13, where a similar change in the price of


produce makes the new surplus produce AH'C' about three times as


large as the old surplus, AHC; and the third in fig. 14. The


earliest doses of capital and labour applied to the land give so


poor a return, that it would not be worth while to apply them


unless it were intended to carry the cultivation further. But


later doses give an increasing return which culminates at P, and


afterwards diminishes. If the price to be got for produce is so


low that an amount OH" is required to remunerate the cultivator


for a dose of capital and labour, it will then be only just


profitable to cultivate the land. For then cultivation will be


carried as far as D"; there will be a deficit on the earlier


doses represented by the area H"AE", and a surplus on the later


doses represented by the area E" PC": and as these two are about


equal, the cultivation of the land so far will only just pay its


way. But if the price of produce rises till OH is sufficient to


remunerate the cultivator for a dose of capital and labour, the


deficit on the earlier doses will sink to HAE, and the surplus on


the later doses will rise to EPC. the net surplus (the true rent


in case the land is hired out) will be the excess of EPC over


HAE. Should the price rise further till OH' is Sufficient to


remunerate the cultivator for a dose of capital and labour, this


net surplus will rise to the very large amount represented by the


excess of E'PC' over H'AE'.





9. In such a case as this the earlier doses are pretty sure to be


sunk in the land; and the actual rent paid, if the land is hired


out, will then include profits on them in addition to the surplus


produce or true rent thus shown. Provision can easily be made in


the diagrams for the returns due to the landlord's capital.





10. Of course his return may diminish and then increase and then


diminish again; and yet again increase when he is in a position


to carry out some further extensive change, as was represented by


fig. 11. But more extreme instances, of the kind represented by


fig. 15, are not very rare.





11. If the price of produce is such that an amount of it OH


(figs. 12, 13, 14) is required to pay the cultivator for one dose


of capital and labour, the cultivation will be carried as far as


D. and the produce raised, AODC, will be greatest in fig. 12,


next greatest in fig. 13, and least in fig. 14. But if the demand


for agricultural produce so rises that OH' is enough to repay the


cultivator for a dose, the cultivation will be carried as far as


D', and the produce raised will be AOD'C', which is greatest in


fig. 14, next in fig. 13, and least in fig. 12. The contrast


would have been even stronger if we had considered the surplus


produce which remains after deducting what is sufficient to repay


the cultivator, and which becomes under some conditions the rent


of the land. For this is AHC in figs. 12 and 13 in the first case


and AH'C' in the second; while in fig. 14 it is in the first case


the excess of AODCPA over ODCH, i.e. the excess of PEC over AHE;


and in the second case the excess of PE'C' over AH'E'.





12. Rogers (Six Centuries of Work and Wages, p. 73) calculates


that rich meadow had about the same value, estimated in grain,


five or six centuries ago as it has now; but that the value of


arable land, similarly estimated, has increased about fivefold in


the same time. This is partly due to the great importance of hay


at a time when roots and other modern kinds of winter food for


cattle were unknown.





13. Thus we may compare two pieces of land represented in figs.


16 and 17, with regard to which the law of diminishing return


acts in a similar way, so that their produce curves have similar


shapes, but the former has a higher fertility than the other for


all degrees of intensity of cultivation. The value of the land


may generally be represented by its surplus produce or rent,


which is in each case represented by AHC when OH is required to


repay a dose of capital and labour; and by AH'C' when the growth


of numbers and wealth have made OH' sufficient. It is clear that


AH'C' in fig. 17 bears a more favourable comparison with AH'C' in


fig. 16 than does AHC in fig. 17 with AHC in fig. 16. In the same


way, though not to the same extent, the total produce AOD'C' in


fig. 17 bears a more favourable comparison with AOD'C' in fig.


16, than does AODC in fig. 17 with AODC in fig. 16. (It is


ingeniously argued in Wicksteed's Coordinates of Laws of


Distribution, pp. 51-2 that rent may be negative. Of course taxes


may absorb rent: but land which will not reward the plough will


grow trees or rough grass. See above, pp. 157-8.)


    Leroy Beaulieu (Répartition des Richesses, chap. II) has


collected several facts illustrating this tendency of poor lands


to rise in value relatively to rich. He quotes the following


figures, showing the rental in francs per hectare (2 1/2 acres)


of five classes of land in several communes of the Départements


de l'Eure et de l'Oise in 1829 and 1852 respectively.





            Class I. Class II. Class III. Class IV. Class V.





 A.D. 1829      58      48          34        20        8


 A.D. 1852      80      78          60        50       40





14. As Roscher says (Political Economy, Sect. CLV), "In judging


Ricardo, it must not be forgotten that it was not his intention


to write a text-book on the science of Political Economy, but


only to communicate to those versed in it the result of his


researches in as brief a manner as possible. Hence he writes so


frequently making certain assumptions, and his words are to be


extended to other cases only after due consideration, or rather


re-written to suit the changed case."





15. Carey claims to have proved that "in every quarter of the


world cultivation has commenced on the sides of the hills where


the soil was poorest, and where the natural advantages of


situation were the least. With the growth of wealth and


population, men have been seen descending from the high lands


bounding the valley on either side, and coming together at its


feet." (Principles of Social Science, chap. IV, 4.) He has even


argued that whenever a thickly peopled country is laid waste,


"whenever population, wealth, and the power of association


decline, it is the rich soil. that is abandoned by men who fly


again to the poor ones" (Ib. ch. v, 3); the rich soils being


rendered difficult and dangerous by the rapid growth of jungles


which harbour wild beasts and banditti, and perhaps by malaria.


The experience of more recent settlers in South Africa and


elsewhere does not however generally support his conclusions,


which are indeed based largely on facts relating to warm


countries. But much of the apparent attractiveness of tropical


countries is delusive: they would give a very rich return to hard


work: but hard work in them is impossible at present, though some


change in this respect may be made by the progress of medical and


especially bacteriological science. A cool refreshing breeze is


as much a necessary of vigorous life as food itself. Land that


offers plenty of food but whose climate destroys energy, is not


more productive of the raw material of human wellbeing, than land


that supplies less food but has an invigorating climate.


    The late Duke of Argyll described the influence of insecurity


and poverty in compelling the cultivation of the hills before


that of the valleys of the Highlands was feasible, Scotland as it


is and was, II, 74-5.


16. In a new country an important form of this assistance is to


enable him to Venture on rich land that he would have otherwise


shunned, through fear of enemies or of malaria.





17. As Ricardo says (Principles, chap. II) "The compensation


given (by the lessee) for the mine or quarry is paid for the


value of the coal or stone which can be removed from them, and


has no connection with the original or indestructible Powers of


the land." But both he and others seem sometimes to lose sight of


these distinctions in discussing the law of diminishing return in


its application to wines. Especially is this the case in


Ricardo's criticism of Adam Smith's theory of rent (Principles,


chap. XXIV).





18. Of course the return to capital spent in building increases


for the earlier doses. Even where land can be had for almost


nothing, it is cheaper to build houses two stories high than one;


and hitherto it has been thought cheapest to build factories


about four stories high. But a belief is growing up in America,


that where land is not very dear factories should be only two


stories high, partly in order to avoid the evil effects of


vibration, and of the expensive foundations and walls required to


prevent it in a high building, that is, it is found that the


return of accommodation diminishes perceptibly after the capital


and labour required to raise two stories have been spent on the


land.





19. See also the writings of Professors Bullock and Landry.





20. In this he will make large use of what is called below the


"substitution" of more for less appropriate means. Discussions


bearing directly on this paragraph will be found in III, V, 1-3;


IV, VII, 8; and XIII, 2: V, III, 3; IV, 1-4; V, 6-8; VIII, 1-5;


X, 3; VI, 1, 7; and II, 5.


    The tendencies of diminishing utility and of diminishing


return have their roots, the one in qualities of human nature,


the other in the technical conditions of industry. But the


distributions of resources, to which they point, are governed by


exactly similar laws. In mathematical phrase, the problems in


maxima and minima to which they give rise are expressed by the


same general equations; as may be seen by reference to


Mathematical Note XIV.





21. The labour-part of the dose is of course current agricultural


labour; the capital-part is itself also the product of labour in


past times rendered by workers of many kinds and degrees,


accompanied by "waiting."








Chapter 4





The Growth of Population








    1. The production of wealth is but a means to the sustenance


of man; to the satisfaction of his wants; and to the development


of his activities, physical, mental, and moral. But man himself


is the chief means of the production of that wealth of which he


is the ultimate aim:(1*) and this and the two following chapters


will be given to some study of the supply of labour; i.e. of the


growth of population in numbers, in strength, in knowledge, and


in character.


    In the animal and vegetable world the growth of numbers is


governed by the tendency of individuals to propagate their


species on the one hand, and on the other hand by the struggle


for life which thins out the young before they arrive at


maturity. In the human race alone the conflict of these two


opposing forces is complicated by other influences. On the one


hand regard for the future induces many individuals to control


their natural impulses; sometimes with the purpose of worthily


discharging their duties as parents; sometimes, as for instance


at Rome under the Empire, for mean motives. And on the other hand


society exercises pressure on the individual by religious, moral


and legal sanctions, sometimes with the object of quickening, and


sometimes with that of retarding, the growth of population.


    The study of the growth of population is often spoken of as


though it were a modern one. But in a more or less vague form it


has occupied the attention of thoughtful men in all ages of the


world. To its influence, often unavowed, sometimes not even


clearly recognized, we can trace a great part of the rules,


customs and ceremonies that have been enjoined in the Eastern and


Western world by law-givers, by moralists, and those nameless


thinkers, whose far-seeing wisdom has left its impress on


national habits. Among vigorous races, and in times of great


military conflict, they aimed at increasing the supply of males


capable of bearing arms; and in the higher stages of progress


they have inculcated a great respect for the sanctity of human


life; but in the lower stages, they have encouraged and even


compelled the ruthless slaughter of the infirm and the aged, and


sometimes of a certain proportion of the female children.


    In ancient Greece and Rome, with the safety-valve of the


power of planting colonies, and in the presence of constant war,


an increase in the number of citizens was regarded as a source of


public strength; and marriage was encouraged by public opinion,


and in many cases even by legislation: though thoughtful men were


even then aware that action in the contrary sense might be


necessary if the responsibilities of parentage should ever cease


to be burdensome.(2*) In later times there may be observed, as


Roscher says,(3*) a regular ebb and flow of the opinion that the


State should encourage the growth of numbers. It was in full flow


in England under the first two Tudors, but in the course of the


sixteenth century it slackened and turned; and it began to ebb,


when the abolition of the celibacy of the religious orders, and


the more settled state of the country had had time to give a


perceptible impetus to population; the effective demand for


labour having meanwhile been diminished by the increase of sheep


runs, and by the collapse of that part of the industrial system


which had been organized by the monastic establishments. Later on


the growth of population was checked by that rise in the standard


of comfort which took effect in the general adoption of wheat as


the staple food of Englishmen during the first half of the


eighteenth century. At that time there were even fears, which


later inquiries showed to be unfounded, that the population was


actually diminishing. Petty(4*) had forestalled some of Carey's


and Wakefield's arguments as to the advantages of a dense


population. Child had argued that "whatever tends to the


depopulating of a country tends to the impoverishment of it;" and


that "most nations in the civilized parts of the world are more


or less rich or poor proportionably to the paucity or plenty of


their people, and not to the sterility or fruitfulness of their


land."(5*) And by the time that the world-struggle with France


had attained its height, when the demands for more and more


troops were ever growing, and when manufacturers were wanting


more men for their new machinery; the bias of the ruling classes


was strongly flowing in favour of an increase of population. So


far did this movement of opinion reach that in 1796 Pitt declared


that a man who had enriched his country with a number of children


had a claim on its assistance. An Act, passed amid the military


anxieties of 1806, which granted exemptions from taxes to the


fathers of more than two children born in wedlock, was repealed


as soon as Napoleon had been safely lodged in St Helena.(6*)


    2. But during all this time there had been a growing feeling


among those who thought most seriously on social problems, that


an inordinate increase of numbers, whether it strengthened the


State or not, must necessarily cause great misery: and that the


rulers of the State had no right to subordinate individual


happiness to the aggrandizement of the State. In France in


particular a reaction was caused, as we have seen, by the cynical


selfishness with which the Court and its adherents sacrificed the


wellbeing of the people for the sake of their own luxury and


military glory. If the humane sympathies of the Physiocrats had


been able to overcome the frivolity and harshness of the


privileged classes of France, the eighteenth century would


probably not have ended in tumult and bloodshed, the march of


freedom in England would not have been arrested, and the dial of


progress would have been more forward than it is by the space of


at least a generation. As it was, but little attention was paid


to Quesnay's guarded but forcible protest: -- "one should aim


less at augmenting the population than at increasing the national


income, for the condition of greater comfort which is derived


from a good income, is preferable to that in which a population


exceeds its income and is ever in urgent need of the means of


subsistence."(7*)


    Adam Smith said but little on the question of population, for


indeed he wrote at one of the culminating points of the


prosperity of the English working classes; but what he does say


is wise and well balanced and modern in tone. Accepting the


Physiocratic doctrine as his basis, he corrected it by insisting


that the necessaries of life are not a fixed and determined


quantity, but have varied much from place to place and time to


time; and may vary more.(8*) But he did not work out this hint


fully. And there was nothing to lead him to anticipate the second


great limitation of the physiocratic doctrine, which has been


made prominent in our time by the carriage of wheat from the


centre of America to Liverpool for less than what had been the


cost of its carriage across England.


    The eighteenth century wore on to its close and the next


century began; year by year the condition of the working classes


in England became more gloomy. An astonishing series of bad


harvests,(9*) a most exhausting war,(10*) and a change in the


methods of industry that dislocated old ties, combined with an


injudicious poor law to bring the working classes into the


greatest misery they have ever suffered, at all events since the


beginning of trustworthy records of English social history.(11*)


And to crown all, well-meaning enthusiasts, chiefly under French


influence, were proposing communistic schemes which would enable


people to throw on society the whole responsibility for rearing


their children.(12*)


    Thus while the recruiting sergeant and the employer of labour


were calling for measures tending to increase the growth of


population, more far-seeing men began to inquire whether the race


could escape degradation if the numbers continued long to


increase as they were then doing. Of these inquirers the chief


was Malthus, and his Essay on the Principle of Population is the


starting-point of all modern speculations on the subject.


    3. Malthus' reasoning consists of three parts, which must be


kept distinct. The first relates to the supply of labour. By a


careful study of facts he proves that every people, of whose


history we have a trustworthy record, has been so prolific that


the growth of its numbers would have been rapid and continuous if


it had not been checked either by a scarcity of the necessaries


of life, or some other cause, that is, by disease, by war, by


infanticide, or lastly by voluntary restraint.


    His second position relates to the demand for labour. Like


the first it is supported by facts, but by a different set of


facts. He shows that up to the time at which he wrote no country


(as distinguished from a city, such as Rome or Venice) had been


able to obtain an abundant supply of the necessaries of life


after its territory had become very thickly peopled. The produce


which Nature returns to the work of man is her effective demand


for population: and he shows that up to this time a rapid


increase in population when already thick had not led to a


proportionate increase in this demand.(13*)


    Thirdly, he draws the conclusion that what had been in the


past, was likely to be in the future; and that the growth of


population would be checked by poverty or some other cause of


suffering unless it were checked by voluntary restraint. He


therefore urges people to use this restraint, and, while leading


lives of moral purity, to abstain from very early marriages.(14*)


    His position with regard to the supply of population, with


which alone we are directly concerned in this chapter, remains


substantially valid. The changes which the course of events has


introduced into the doctrine of population relate chiefly to the


second and third steps of his reasoning. We have already noticed


that the English economists of the earlier half of last century


overrated the tendency of an increasing population to press upon


the means of subsistence; and it was not Malthus' fault that he


could not foresee the great developments of steam transport by


land and by sea, which have enabled Englishmen of the present


generation to obtain the products of the richest lands of the


earth at comparatively small cost.


    But the fact that he did not foresee these changes makes the


second and third steps of his argument antiquated in form; though


they are still in a great measure valid in substance. It remains


true that unless the checks on the growth of population in force


at the end of the nineteenth century are on the whole increased


(they are certain to change their form in places that are as yet


imperfectly civilized) it will be impossible for the habits of


comfort prevailing in Western Europe to spread themselves over


the whole world and maintain themselves for many hundred years.


But of this more hereafter.(15*)


    4. The growth in numbers of a people depends firstly on the


Natural Increase, that is, the excess of their births over their


deaths; and secondly on migration.


    The number of births depends chiefly on habits relating to


marriage, the early history of which is full of instruction; but


we must confine ourselves here to the conditions of marriage in


modern civilized countries.


    The age of marriage varies with the climate. In warm climates


where childbearing begins early, it ends early, in colder


climates it begins later and ends later;(16*) but in every case


the longer marriages are postponed beyond the age that is natural


to the country, the smaller is the birth-rate; the age of the


wife being of course much more important in this respect than


that of the husband.(17*) Given the climate, the average age of


marriage depends chiefly on the ease with which young people can


establish themselves, and support a family according to the


standard of comfort that prevails among their friends and


acquaintances; and therefore it is different in different


stations of life.


    In the middle classes a man's income seldom reaches its


maximum till he is forty or fifty years old; and the expense of


bringing up his children is heavy and lasts for many years. The


artisan earns nearly as much at twenty-one as he ever does,


unless he rises to a responsible post, but he does not earn much


before he is twenty-one: his children are likely to be a


considerable expense to him till about the age of fifteen; unless


they are sent into a factory, where they may pay their way at a


very early age; and lastly the labourer earns nearly full wages


at eighteen, while his children begin to pay their own expenses


very early. In consequence, the average age at marriage is


highest among the middle classes: it is low among the artisans


and lower still among the unskilled labourers.(18*)


    Unskilled labourers, when not so poor as to suffer actual


want and not restrained by any external cause, have seldom, if


ever, shown a lower power of increase than that of doubling in


thirty years; that is, of multiplying a million-fold in six


hundred years, a billion-fold in twelve hundred: and hence it


might be inferred a priori that their increase has never gone on


without restraint for any considerable time. This inference is


confirmed by the teaching of all history. Throughout Europe


during the Middle Ages, and in some parts of it even up to the


present time, unmarried labourers have usually slept in the


farmhouse or with their parents; while a married pair have


generally required a house for themselves: when a village has as


many hands as it can well employ, the number of houses is not


increased, and young people have to wait as best they can.


    There are many parts of Europe even now in which custom


exercising the force of law prevents more than one son in each


family from marrying; he is generally the eldest, but in some


places the youngest: if any other son marries he must leave the


village. When great material prosperity and the absence of all


extreme poverty are found in old-fashioned corners of the Old


World, the explanation generally lies in some such custom as this


with all its evils and hardships.(19*) It is true that the


severity of this custom may be tempered by the power of


migration; but in the Middle Ages the free movement of the people


was hindered by stern regulations. The free towns indeed often


encouraged immigration from the country: but the rules of the


gilds were in some respects almost as cruel to people who tried


to escape from their old homes as were those enforced by the


feudal lords themselves.(20*)


    5. In this respect the position of the hired agricultural


labourer has changed very much. The towns are now always open to


him and his children; and if he betakes himself to the New World


he is likely to succeed better than any other class of emigrants.


But on the other hand the gradual rise in the value of land and


its growing scarcity is tending to check the increase of


population in some districts in which the system of peasant


properties prevails, in which there is not much enterprise for


opening out new trades or for emigration, and parents feel that


the social position of their children will depend on the amount


of their land. They incline to limit artificially the size of


their families and to treat marriage very much as a business


contract, seeking always to marry their sons to heiresses.


Francis Galton pointed out that, though the families of English


peers are generally large, the habits of marrying the eldest son


to an heiress who is presumably not of fertile stock, and


sometimes dissuading younger sons from marriage, have led to the


extinction of many peerages. Similar habits among French


peasants, combined with their preference for small families, keep


their numbers almost stationary.


    On the other hand there seem to be no conditions more


favourable to the rapid growth of numbers than those of the


agricultural districts of new countries. Land is to be had in


abundance, railways and steamships carry away the produce of the


land and bring back in exchange implements of advanced types, and


many of the comforts and luxuries of life. The "farmer," as the


peasant proprietor is called in America, finds therefore that a


large family is not a burden, but an assistance to him. He and


they live healthy out-of-door lives; there is nothing to check


but everything to stimulate the growth of numbers. The natural


increase is aided by immigration; and thus, in spite of the fact


that some classes of the inhabitants of large cities in America


are, it is said, reluctant to have many children, the population


has increased sixteen-fold in the last hundred years.(21*)


    On the whole it seems proved that the birth-rate is generally


lower among the well-to-do than among those who make little


expensive provision for the future of themselves and their


families, and who live an active life: and that fecundity is


diminished by luxurious habits of living. Probably it is also


diminished by severe mental strain; that is to say, given the


natural strength of the parents, their expectation of a large


family is diminished by a great increase of mental strain. Of


course those who do high mental work, have as a class more than


the average of constitutional and nervous strength; and Galton


has shown that they are not as a class unprolific. But they


commonly marry late.


    6. The growth of population in England has a more clearly


defined history than that in the United Kingdom, and we shall


find some interest in noticing its chief movements.


    The restraints on the increase of numbers during the Middle


Ages were the same in England as elsewhere. In England as


elsewhere the religious orders were a refuge to those for whom no


establishment in marriage could be provided; and religious


celibacy while undoubtedly acting in some measure as an


independent check on the growth of population, is in the main to


be regarded rather as a method in which the broad natural forces


tending to restrain population expressed themselves, than as an


addition to them. Infectious and contagious diseases, both


endemic and epidemic, were caused by dirty habits of life which


were even worse in England than in the South of Europe; and


famines by the failures of good harvests and the difficulties of


communication; though this evil was less in England than


elsewhere.


    Country life was, as elsewhere, rigid in its habits; young


people found it difficult to establish themselves until some


other married pair had passed from the scene and made a vacancy


in their own parish; for migration to another parish was seldom


thought of by an agricultural labourer under ordinary


circumstances. Consequently whenever plague or war or famine


thinned the population, there were always many waiting to be


married, who filled the vacant places; and, being perhaps younger


and stronger than the average of newly married couples, had


larger families.(22*)


    There was however some movement even of agricultural


labourers towards districts which had been struck more heavily


than their neighbours by pestilence, by famine or the sword.


Moreover artisans were often more or less on the move, and this


was especially the case with those who were engaged in the


building trades, and those who worked in metal and wood; though


no doubt the "wander years" were chiefly those of youth, and


after these were over the wanderer was likely to settle down in


the place in which he was born. Again, there seems to have been a


good deal of migration on the part of the retainers of the landed


gentry, especially of the greater barons who had seats in several


parts of the country. And lastly, in spite of the selfish


exclusiveness which the gilds developed as years went on, the


towns offered in England as elsewhere a refuge to many who could


get no good openings for work and for marriage in their own


homes. In these various ways some elasticity was introduced into


the rigid system of medieval economy; and population was able to


avail itself in some measure of the increased demand for labour


which came gradually with the growth of knowledge, the


establishment of law and order, and the development of oceanic


trade.(23*)


    In the latter half of the seventeenth and the first half of


the eighteenth century the central government exerted itself to


hinder the adjustment of the supply of population in different


parts of the country to the demand for it by Settlement laws,


which made any one chargeable to a parish who had resided there


forty days, but ordered that he might be sent home by force at


any time within that period.(24*) Landlords and farmers were so


eager to prevent people from getting a "settlement" in their


parish that they put great difficulties in the way of building


cottages, and sometimes even razed them to the ground. In


consequence the agricultural population of England was stationary


during the hundred years ending with 1760; while the manufactures


were not yet sufficiently developed to absorb large numbers. This


retardation in the growth of numbers was partly caused by, and


partly a cause of, a rise in the standard of living; a chief


element of which was an increased use of wheat in the place of


inferior grains as the food of the common people.(25*)


    From 1760 onwards those who could not establish themselves at


home found little difficulty in getting employment in the new


manufacturing or mining districts, where the demand for workers


often kept the local authorities from enforcing the removal


clauses of the Settlement Act. To these districts young people


resorted freely, and the birthrate in them became exceptionally


high; but so did the death-rate also; the net result being a


fairly rapid growth of population. At the end of the century,


when Malthus wrote, the Poor Law again began to influence the age


of marriage; but this time in the direction of making it unduly


early. The sufferings of the working classes caused by a series


of famines and by the French War made some measure of relief


necessary; and the need of large bodies of recruits for the army


and navy was an additional inducement to tender-hearted people to


be somewhat liberal in their allowances to a large family, with


the practical effect of making the father of many children often


able to procure more indulgences for himself without working than


he could have got by hard work if he had been unmarried or had


only a small family. Those who availed themselves most of this


bounty were naturally the laziest and meanest of the people,


those with least self-respect and enterprise. So although there


was in the manufacturing towns a fearful mortality, particularly


of infants, the quantity of the people increased fast; but its


quality improved little, if at all, till the passing of the New


Poor Law in 1834. Since that time the rapid growth of the town


population has, as we shall see in the next chapter, tended to


increase mortality, but this has been counteracted by the growth


of temperance, of medical knowledge, of sanitation and of general


cleanliness. Emigration has increased, the age of marriage has


been slightly raised and a somewhat less proportion of the whole


population are married; but, on the other hand, the ratio of


births to a marriage has risen;(26*) with the result that


population has been growing very nearly steadily.(27*) Let us


examine the course of recent changes a little more closely.


    7. Early in this century, when wages were low and wheat was


dear, the working classes generally spent more than half their


income on bread: and consequently a rise in the price of wheat


diminished marriages very much among them: that is, it diminished


very much the number of marriages by banns. But it raised the


income of many members of the well-to-do classes, and therefore


often increased the number of marriages by licence.(28*) Since


however these were but a small part of the whole, the net effect


was to lower the marriage-rate.(29*) But as time went on, the


price of wheat fell and wages rose, till now the working classes


spend on the average less than a quarter of their incomes on


bread; and in consequence the variations of commercial prosperity


have got to exercise a preponderating influence on the


marriage-rate.(30*)


    Since 1873 though the average real income of the population


of England has indeed been increasing, its rate of increase has


been less than in the preceding years, and meanwhile there has


been a continuous fall of prices, and consequently a continuous


fall in the money incomes of many classes of society. Now people


are governed in their calculations as to whether they can afford


to marry or not, more by the money income which they expect to be


able to get, than by elaborate calculations of changes in its


purchasing power. And therefore the standard of living among the


working classes has been rising rapidly, perhaps more rapidly


than at any other time in English history; their household


expenditure measured in money has remained about stationary, and


measured in goods has increased very fast. Meanwhile the price of


wheat has also fallen very much, and a marked fall in the


marriage-rate for the whole country has often accompanied a


marked fall in the price of wheat. The marriage-rate is now


reckoned on the basis that each marriage involves two persons and


should therefore count for two. The English rate fell from 17.6


per thousand in 1873 to 14.2 in 1886. It rose to 16.5 in 1899; in


1907 it was 15.8, but in 1908 only 14.9.(31*)


    There is much to be learnt from the history of population in


Scotland and in Ireland. In the lowlands of Scotland a high


standard of education, the development of mineral resources, and


close contact with their richer English neighbours have combined


to afford a great increase of average income to a rapidly


increasing population. On the other hand, the inordinate growth


of population in Ireland before the potato-famine in 1847, and


its steady diminution since that time, will remain for ever


landmarks in economic history.


    Comparing the habits of different nations(32*) we find that


in the Teutonic countries of Central and Northern Europe, the age


of marriage is kept late, partly in consequence of the early


years of manhood being spent in the army; but that it has been


very early in Russia; where, at all events under the old régime,


the family group insisted on the son's bringing a wife to help in


the work of the household as early as possible, even if he had to


leave her for a time and go to earn his living elsewhere. In the


United Kingdom and America there is no compulsory service, and


men marry early. In France, contrary to general opinion, early


marriages on the part of men are not rare; while on the part of


women they are more common than in any country for which we have


statistics, except the Slavonic countries, where they are much


the highest.


    The marriage-rate, the birth-rate and the death-rate are


diminishing in almost every country. But the general mortality is


high where the birth-rate is high. For instance, both are high in


Slavonic countries, and both are low in the North of Europe. The


death-rates are low in Australasia, and the "natural" increase


there is fairly high, though the birth-rate is low and falling


very fast. In fact its fall in the various States ranged from 23


to 30 per cent in the period 1881-1901.(33*)





NOTES:





1. See IV, i, section 1.





2. Thus Aristotle (Politics, II, 6) objects to Plato's scheme for


equalizing property and abolishing poverty on the ground that it


would be unworkable unless the State exercised a firm control


over the growth of numbers. And as Jowett points out, Plato


himself was aware of this (see Laws, v, 740: also Aristotle,


Politics, VII, 16). The opinion, formerly held that the


population of Greece declined from the seventh century B.C., and


that of Rome from the third, has recently been called in


question, see "Die Bevölkerung des Altertums" by Edouard Meyer in


the Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften.





3. Political Economy, section 254.





4. He argues that Holland is richer than it appears to be


relatively to France, because its people have access to many


advantages that cannot be had by those who live on poorer land,


and are therefore more scattered. "rich land is better than


coarse land of the same rent." Political Arithmetick, ch. 1.





5. Discourses on Trade, ch. X. Harris, Essay on Coins, pp. 32-3,


argues to a similar effect, and proposes to "encourage matrimony


among the lower classes by giving some privileges to those who


have children," etc.





6. "Let us," said Pitt, "make relief, in cases where there are a


large number of children, a matter of right and an honour,


instead of a ground for opprobrium and contempt. This will make a


large family a blessing and not a curse, and this will draw a


proper line of distinction between those who are able to provide


for themselves by labour, and those who after having enriched


their country with a number of children have a claim on its


assistance for their support." Of course he desired "to


discourage relief where it was not wanted." Napoleon the First


had offered to take under his own charge one member of any family


which contained seven male children; and Louis XIV his


predecessor in the slaughter of men, had exempted from public


taxes all those who married before the age of 20 or had more than


ten legitimate children. A comparison of the rapid increase in


the population of Germany with that of France was a chief motive


of the order of the French Chamber in 1885 that education and


board should be provided at the public expense for every seventh


child in necessitous families: and in 1913 a law was passed


giving bounties under certain conditions to parents of large


families. The British Budget Bill of 1909 allowed a small


abatement of income tax for fathers of families.





7. The Physiocratic doctrine with regard to the tendency of


population to increase up to the margin of subsistence may be


given in Turgot's words: -- the employer "since he always has his


choice of a great number of working men, will choose that one who


will work most cheaply. Thus then the workers are compelled by


mutual competition to lower their price; and with regard to every


kind of labour the result is bound to be reached and it is


reached as a matter of fact -- that the wages of the worker are


limited to that which is necessary to procure his subsistence."


(Sur la formation et la distribution des richesses, VI) Similarly


Sir James Steuart says (Inquiry, Bk. 1, ch. III), "The generative


faculty resembles a spring loaded with a weight, which always


exerts itself in proportion to the diminution of resistance: when


food has remained some time without augmentation or diminution,


generation will carry numbers as high as possible; if then food


comes to be diminished the spring is overpowered; the force of it


becomes less than nothing, inhabitants will diminish at least in


proportion to the overcharge. If, on the other hand, food be


increased, the spring which stood at 0, will begin to exert


itself in proportion as the resistance diminishes; people will


begin to be better fed; they will multiply, and in proportion as


they increase in numbers the food will become scarce again." Sir


James Steuart was much under the influence of the Physiocrats,


and was indeed in some respects imbued with Continental rather


than English notions of government: and his artificial schemes


for regulating population seem very far off from us now. See his


Inquiry, Bk. I, ch. XII, "Of the great advantage of combining a


well-digested Theory and a perfect Knowledge of Facts with the


Practical Part of Government in order to make a People multiply."





8. See Wealth of Nations, Bk. I, ch. VIII, and Bk. V, ch. II. See


also supra, Bk. II, ch. III.





9. The average price of wheat in the decade 1771-80 in which Adam


Smith wrote was 34s. 7d.; in 1781-90 it was 37s. 1d.; in


1791-1800 it was 63s. 6d.; in 1801-10 it was 83s. 11d.; and in


1811-20 it was 87s. 6d.





10. Early in the last century the Imperial taxes for the greater


part war taxes amounted to one-fifth of the whole income of the


country; whereas now they are not much more than a twentieth, and


even of this a great part is spent on education and other


benefits which Government did not then afford.


11. See below section 7 and above Bk. I, ch. III, section 5.





12. Especially Godwin in his Inquiry concerning Political Justice


(1792). It is interesting to compare Malthus' criticism of this


Essay (Bk. III, ch. II) with Aristotle's comments on Plato's


Republic (see especially Politics, II, 6).





13. But many of his critics suppose him to have stated his


position much less unreservedly than he did; they have forgotten


such passages as this: -- "From a review of the state of society


in former periods compared with the present I should certainly


say that the evils resulting from the principle of population


have rather diminished than increased, even under the


disadvantage of an almost total ignorance of their real cause.


And if we can indulge the hope that this ignorance will be


gradually dissipated, it does not seem unreasonable to hope that


they will be still further diminished. The increase of absolute


population, which will of course take place, will evidently tend


but little to weaken this expectation, as everything depends on


the relative proportions between population and food, and not on


the absolute number of the people. In the former part of this


work it appeared that the countries which possessed the fewest


people often suffered the most from the effects of the principle


of population." Essay, Bk. IV, ch. XII.





14. In the first edition of his essay, 1798, Malthus gave his


argument without any detailed statement of facts, though from the


first he regarded it as needing to be treated in direct


connection with a study of facts; as is shown by his having told


Pryme (who afterwards became the first Professor of Political


Economy at Cambridge) "that his theory was first suggested to his


mind in an argumentative conversation which he had with his


father on the state of some other countries" (Pryme's


Recollections, p. 66). American experience showed that population


if unchecked would double at least once in twenty-five years. He


argued that a doubled population might, even in a country as


thickly peopled as England was with its seven million


inhabitants, conceivably though not probably double the


subsistence raised from the English soil: but that labour doubled


again would not suffice to double the produce again. "Let us then


take this for our rule, though certainly far beyond the truth;


and allow that the whole produce of the island might be increased


every twenty five years [that is with every doubling of the


population] by a quantity of subsistence equal to that which it


at present produces"; or in other words, in an arithmetical


progression. His desire to make himself clearly understood made


him, as Wagner says in his excellent introduction to the study of


Population (Grundlegung, Ed. 3, p. 453), "put too sharp a point


on his doctrine, and formulate it too absolutely." Thus he got


into the habit of speaking of production as capable of increasing


in an arithmetical ratio: and many writers think that he attached


importance to the phrase itself: whereas it was really only a


short way of stating the utmost that he thought any reasonable


person could ask him to concede. What he meant, stated in modern


language, was that the tendency to diminishing return, which is


assumed throughout his argument, would begin to operate sharply


after the produce of the island had been doubled. Doubled labour


might give doubled produce: but quadrupled labour would hardly


treble it: octupled labour would not quadruple it.


    In the second edition, 1803, he based himself on so wide and


careful a statement of facts as to claim a place among the


founders of historical economics; he softened and explained away


many of the "sharp points" of his old doctrine, though he did not


abandon (as was implied in the earlier editions of this work) the


use of the phrase "arithmetical ratio." In particular he took a


less despondent view of the future of the human race; and dwelt


on the hope that moral restraint might hold population in check,


and that "vice and misery," the old check, might thus be kept in


abeyance. Francis Place, who was not blind to his many faults,


wrote in 1822 an apology for him, excellent in tone and judgment.


Good accounts of his work are given in Bonar's Malthus and his


Work, Cannan's Production and Distribution, 1776-1848, and


Nicholson's Political Economy, Bk. 1, ch. XII.


15. Taking the present population of the world at one and a half


thousand millions; and assuming that its present rate of increase


(about 8 per 1000 annually, see Ravenstein's paper before the


British Association in 1890) will continue, we find that in less


than two hundred years it will amount to six thousand millions;


or at the rate of about 200 to the square mile of fairly fertile


land (Ravenstein reckons 28 million square miles of fairly


fertile land, and 14 millions of poor grass lands. The first


estimate is thought by many to be too high: but, allowing for


this, if the less fertile land be reckoned in for what it is


worth, the result will be about thirty million square miles as


assumed above). Meanwhile there will probably be great


improvements in the arts of agriculture; and, if so, the pressure


of population on the means of subsistence may be held in check


for about two hundred years, but not longer.





16. Of course the length of a generation has itself some


influence on the growth of population. If it is 25 years in one


place and 20 in another; and if in each place population doubles


once in two generations during a thousand years, the increase


will be a million-fold in the first place, but thirty


million-fold in the second.





17. Dr Ogle (Statistical Journal, Vol. 53) calculates that if the


average age of marriage of women in England were postponed five


years, the number of children to a marriage, which is now 4.2


would fall to 3.1. Korösi, basing himself on the facts of the


relatively warm climate of Buda Pest, finds 18-20 the most


prolific age for women, 24-26 that for men. But he concludes that


a slight postponement of weddings beyond these ages is advisable


mainly on the ground that the vitality of the children of women


under 20 is generally small. See Proceedings of Congress of


Hygiene and Demography, London 1892, and Statistical Journal, Vol


57.





18. The term marriage in the text must be taken in a wide sense


so as to include not only legal marriages, but all those informal


unions which are sufficiently permanent in character to involve


for several years at least the practical responsibilities of


married life. They are often contracted at an early age, and not


unfrequently lead up to legal marriages after the lapse of some


years. For this reason the average age at marriage in the broad


sense of the term, with which alone we are here concerned, is


below the average age at legal marriage. The allowance to be made


on this head for the whole of the working classes is probably


considerable; but it is very much greater in the case of


unskilled labourers than of any other class. The following


statistics must be interpreted in the light of this remark, and


of the fact that all English industrial statistics are vitiated


by the want of sufficient care in the classification of the


working classes in our official returns. The Registrar-General's


forty-ninth Annual Report states that in certain selected


districts the returns of marriages for 1884-5 were examined with


the following results; the number after each occupation being the


average age of bachelors in it at marriage, and the following


number, in brackets, being the average age of spinsters who


married men of that occupation: -- Miners 24.06 (22.46); Textile


hands 24.38 (23.43); Shoemakers, Tailors 24.92 (24.31); Artisans


25.35 (23.70); Labourers 15.56 (23.66); Commercial Clerks 16.15


(24.43); Shopkeepers, Shopmen 26.67 (24.22); Farmers and sons


29.23 (26.91); Professional and Independent Class 31.22 (26.40).


    Dr Ogle, in the paper already referred to, shows that the


marriage-rate is greatest generally in those parts of England in


which the percentage of those women between 15 and 25 years of


age who are industrially occupied is the greatest. This is no


doubt due, as he suggests, partly to the willingness of men to


have their money incomes supplemented by those of their wives;


but it may be partly due also to an excess of women of a


marriageable age in those districts.





19. Thus a visit to the valley Jachenau in the Bavarian Alps


about 1880 found this custom still in full force. Aided by a


great recent rise in the value of their woods, with regard to


which they had pursued a farseeing policy, the inhabitants lived


prosperously in large houses, the younger brothers and sisters


acting as servants in their old homes or elsewhere. They were of


a different race from the workpeople in the neighbouring valleys,


who lived poor and hard lives, but seemed to think that the


Jachenau purchased its material prosperity at too great a cost.





20. See e.g. Rogers, Six Centuries, pp. 106-7.





21. The extreme prudence of peasant proprietors under stationary


conditions was noticed by Malthus; see his account of Switzerland


(Essay, Bk. II, ch. v). Adam Smith remarked that poor Highland


women frequently had twenty children of whom not more than two


reached maturity (Wealth of Nations, Bk. 1, ch. VIII); and the


notion that want stimulated fertility was insisted on by


Doubleday, True Law of Population. See also Sadler, Law of


Population. Herbert Spencer seemed to think it probable that the


progress of civilization will of itself hold the growth of


population completely in check. But Malthus' remark, that the


reproductive power is less in barbarous than in civilized races,


has been extended by Darwin to the animal and vegetable kingdom


generally.


    Mr Charles Booth (Statistical Journal, 1893) has divided


London into 27 districts (chiefly Registration districts); and


arranged them in order of poverty, of overcrowding, of high


birth-rate and of high death-rate. He finds that the four orders


are generally the same. The excess of birth rate over death-rate


is lowest in the very rich and the very poor districts.


    The birth-rate in England and Wales is nominally diminishing


at about an equal rate in both town and country. But the


continuous migration of young persons from rural to industrial


areas has considerably depleted the ranks of young married women


in the rural districts; and, when allowance is made for this


fact, we find that the percentage of births to women of


childbearing ages is much higher in them than in the towns: as is


shown in the following table published by the Registrar-General


in 1907.





    Mean Annual Birth Rates in Urban and Rural Areas





Urban: 20 large towns, with an aggregate population of 9,742,404


persons at the date of the Census of 1901.





 Period         Calculated on the total population





                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in


                                     1870-72 taken as 100





 1870-72            36.7                100.0


 1880-82            35.7                 97.3


 1890-92            32.0                 87.2


 1900-02            28.8                 81.2





              Calculated on the female population, aged 15-45


years





                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in


                                     1870-72 taken as 100





 1870-72            143.1               100.0


 1880-82            140.6                98.3


 1890-92            124.6                87.1


 1900-02            111.4                77.8





 Rural: 112 entirely rural registration districts, with an


aggregate population of 1,330,319 persons at the date of the


Census of 1901.





                Calculated on the total population





                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in


                                     1870-72 taken as 100





 1870-72             31.6                100.0


 1880-82             30.3                 95.6


 1890-92             27.8                 88.0


 1900-02             26.0                 83.3





              Calculated on the female population, aged 15-45


years





                Rate per 1000       Compared with rate in


                                     1870-72 taken as 100





 1870-72            158.9                100.0


 1880-82            153.5                 96.6


 1890-92            135.6                 85.3


 1900-02            120.7                 76.0





    The movements of the population of France have been studied


with exceptional care: and the great work on the subject by


Levasseur, La Population Française, is a mine of valuable


information as regards other nations besides France. Montesquieu,


reasoning perhaps rather a priori, accused the law of


primogeniture which ruled in his time in France of reducing the


number of children in a family: and le Play brought the same


charge against the law of compulsory division. Levasseur (l.c.


Vol. iii, pp. 171-7) calls attention to the contrast; and remark


that Malthus' expectations of the effect of the Civil Code on


population were in harmony with Montesquieu's rather than le


Play's diagnosis. But in fact the birthrate varies much from one


part of France to another. It is generally lower where a large


part of the population owns land than where it does not. If


however the Departments of France be arranged in groups in


ascending order of the property left at death (valeurs


successorales par tête d'habitant), the corresponding birth-rate


descends almost uniformly, being 23 per hundred married women


between 15 and 50 years for the ten Departments in which the


property left is 48-57 fr.; and 13.2 for the Seine, where it is


412 fr. And in Paris itself the arrondissements inhabited by the


well-to-do show a smaller percentage of families with more than


two children than the poorer arrondissements show. There is much


interest in the careful analysis which Levasseur gives of the


connection between economic conditions and birth-rate; his


general conclusion being that it is not direct but indirect,


through the mutual influence of the two on manners and the habit


of life (moeurs). He appears to hold that, however much the


decline in the numbers of the French relatively to surrounding


nations may be regretted from the political and military points


of view, there is much good mixed with the evil in its influences


on material comfort and even social progress.





22. Thus we are told that after the Black Death of 1349 most


marriages were very fertile (Rogers, History of Agriculture and


Prices, Vol. 1, p. 301).





23. There is no certain knowledge to be had as to the density of


population in England before the eighteenth century. but the


following estimates, reproduced from Steffen (Geschichte der


englischen Lohn-arbeiter, 1, pp. 463 ff.), are probably the best


as yet available. Domesday Book suggests that in 1086 the


population of England was between two, and two-and-a-half


millions. Just before the Black Death (1348) it may have been


between three-and-a-half, and four-and-a-half millions; and just


afterwards two-and-a-half millions. It began to recover quickly;


but made slow progress between 1400 and 1550: it increased rather


fast in the next hundred years, and reached five-and-a half


millions in 1700.


    If we are to trust Harrison (Description of England, Bk. II,


ch. XVI), the muster of men able for service in 1574 amounted to


1,172,674.


    The Black Death was England's only very great calamity. She


was not, like the rest of Europe, liable to devastating wars,


such as the Thirty Years' War, which destroyed more than half the


population of Germany, a loss which it required a full century to


recover. (See Rümelin's instructive article on Bevölkerungslehre


in Schönberg's Handbuch.)





24. Adam Smith is justly indignant at this. (See Wealth of


Nations, Bk. I, ch. X, Part II, and Book IV, ch. II.) The Act


recites (14 Charles II, c. 12, A.D. 1662) that " by reason of


some defects in the law, poor people are not restrained from


going from one parish to another, and thereby do endeavour to


settle themselves in those parishes where there is the best


stock, the largest wastes or commons to build cottages, and the


most woods for them to burn and destroy: etc." and it is


therefore ordered " that upon complaint made... within forty days


after any such person or persons coming, so as to settle as


aforesaid, in any tenement under the yearly value of ten


pounds... it shall be lawful for any two justices of the Peace...


to remove and convey such person or persons to such parish where


he or they were last legally settled." Several Acts purporting to


soften its harshness had been passed before Adam Smith's time;


but they had been ineffective. In 1795 however it was ordered


that no one should be removed until he became actually


chargeable.





25. Some interesting remarks on this subject are made by Eden,


History of the Poor, I, pp. 560-4.





26. But this increase in the figures shown is partly due to


improved registration of births. (Farr, Vital Statistics, p. 97.)





27. The following tables show the growth of the population of


England and Wales from the beginning of the eighteenth century.


The figures before 1801 are computed from the registers of births


and deaths, and the poll and hearth tax returns: those since 1801


from Census returns. It will be noticed that the numbers


increased nearly as much in the twenty years following 1760 as in


the preceding sixty years. The pressure of the great war and the


high price of corn is shown in the slow growth between 1790 and


1801; and the effects of indiscriminate poor law allowances, in


spite of greater pressure, is shown by the rapid increase in the


next ten years, and the still greater increase when that pressure


was removed in the decade ending 1821. The third column shows the


percentage which the increase during the preceding decade was of


the population at the beginning of that decade.





 Year       Population           Increase


            000s omitted         per cent





 1700        5,475


 1710        5,240                  -4.9


 1720        5,565                   6.2


 1730        5,796                   4.1


 1740        6,064                   4.6


 1750        6,467                   6.6


 1760        6,736                   4.1


 1770        7,428                  10.3


 1780        7,953                   7.1


 1790        8,675                   9.1


 1801        8,892                   2.5


 1811       10,164                  14.3


 1821       12,000                  18.1


 1831       13,897                  15.8


 1841       15,909                  14.5


 1851       17,928                  12.7


 1861       20,066                  11.9


 1871       22,712                  13.2


 1881       25,974                  14.4


 1891       29,022                  11.7


 1901       32,527                  11.7








    The great growth of emigration during recent years makes it


important to correct the figures for the last three decades so as


to show the "natural increase," viz. that due to the excess of


births over deaths. The net emigration from the United Kingdom


during the decades 1871-81 and 1881-91 was 1,480,000, and


1,747,000 respectively.





28. See Farr's 17th Annual Report for 1854 as Registrar-General,


or the abstract of it in Vital Statistics (pp. 72-5).





29. For instance, representing the price of wheat in shillings


and the number of marriages in England and Wales in thousands, we


have for 1801 wheat at 119 and marriages at 67, for 1803 wheat at


59 and marriages at 94; for 1805 the numbers are 90 and 80, for


1807 they are 75 and 84, for 1812 they are 126 and 82, for 1815


they are 66 and 100, for 1917 they are 97 and 88, for 1822 they


are 45 and 99.





30. Since 1820 the average price of wheat has seldom exceeded


60s. and never 75s.: and the successive inflations of commerce


which culminated and broke in 1826, 1836-9, 1848, 1856, 1866 and


1873 exercised an influence on the marriage rate about equal with


changes in the price of corn. When the two causes act together


the effects are very striking: thus between 1829 and 1834, there


was a recovery of prosperity accompanied by a steady fall in the


price of wheat and marriages rose from a hundred and four to a


hundred and twenty-one thousand. The marriage-rate rose again


rapidly between 1842 and 1845 when the price of wheat was a


little lower than in the preceding years, and the business of the


country was reviving; and again under similar circumstances


between 1847 and 1853 and between 1862 and 1865.


    A comparison of the marriage-rate with the harvests in Sweden


for the years 1749 to 1883 is given by Sir Rawson Rawson in the


Statistical Journal for December 1885. The harvest does not


declare itself till part of the year's tale of marriages is made


up; and further the inequalities of harvests are to some extent


compensated for by the storage of grain; and therefore the


individual harvest figures do not correspond closely with the


marriage-rate. But when several good or bad harvests come


together, the effect in increasing or diminishing the


marriage-rate is very clearly marked.





31. Statistics of exports are among the most convenient


indications of the fluctuations of commercial credit and


industrial activity: and in the article already quoted, Ogle has


shown a correspondence between the marriage-rate and the exports


per head. Compare diagrams in Vol. II, p. 12 of Levasseur's La


Population Française; and with regard to Massachusetts by Willcox


in the Political Science Quarterly, Vol. VIII, pp. 76-82. Ogle's


inquiries have been extended and corrected in a paper read by R.


H. Hooker before the Manchester Statistical Society, in January


1898; who points out that if the marriage-rate fluctuates, the


birth-rate during an ascending phase of the marriage-rate is apt


to correspond to the marriage-rate not for that phase, but for


the preceding phase when the marriage-rate was declining: and


vice vers? "Hence the ratio of births to marriages declines when


the marriage-rate is rising and rises when the marriage-rate


falls. A curve representing the ratio of births to marriages will


move inversely to the marriage-rate." He points out that the


decline in the ratio of births to marriages is not great, and is


accounted for by the rapid decline of illegitimate births. The


ratio of legitimate births to marriages is not declining


perceptibly.





32. The following statements are based chiefly on statistics


arranged by the late Signor Bodio, by M. Levasseur, La Population


Française, and by the English Registrar-General in his Report for


1907.





33. Much instructive and suggestive matter connected with the


subject of this chapter is contained in the Statistical Memoranda


and Charts relating to Public Health and Social Conditions


published by the Local Government Board in 1909 [Cd. 4671].





Chapter 5





The Health and Strength of the Population





    1. We have next to consider the conditions on which depend


health and strength, physical, mental and moral. They are the


basis of industrial efficiency, on which the production of


material wealth depends; while conversely the chief importance of


material wealth lies in the fact that, when wisely used, it


increases the health and strength, physical, mental and moral of


the human race.


    In many occupations industrial efficiency requires little


else than physical vigour; that is, muscular strength, a good


constitution and energetic habits. In estimating muscular, or


indeed any other kind of strength for industrial purposes, we


must take account of the number of hours in the day, of the


number of days in the year, and the number of years in the


lifetime, during which it can be exerted. But with this


precaution we can measure a man's muscular exertion by the number


of feet through which his work would raise a pound weight, if it


were applied directly to this use; or in other words by the


number of "foot pounds" of work that he does.(1*)


    Although the power of sustaining great muscular exertion


seems to rest on constitutional strength and other physical


conditions, yet even it depends also on force of will, and


strength of character. Energy of this kind, which may perhaps be


taken to be the strength of the man, as distinguished from that


of his body, is moral rather than physical; but yet it depends on


the physical condition of nervous strength. This strength of the


man himself, this resolution, energy and self-mastery, or in


short this "vigour" is the source of all progress: it shows


itself in great deeds, in great thoughts and in the capacity for


true religious feeling.(2*)


    Vigour works itself out in so many forms, that no simple


measure of it is possible. But we are all of us constantly


estimating vigour, and thinking of one person as having more


"backbone," more "stuff in him," or as being "a stronger man"


than another. Business men even in different trades, and


University men even when engaged in different studies, get to


estimate one another's strength very closely. It soon becomes


known if less strength is required to get a "first class" in one


study than another.





    2. In discussing the growth of numbers a little has been said


incidentally of the causes which determine length of life: but


they are in the main the same as those which determine


constitutional strength and vigour, and they will occupy our


attention again in the present chapter.


    The first of these causes is the climate. In warm countries


we find early marriages and high birth-rates, and in consequence


a low respect for human life: this has probably been the cause of


a great part of the high mortality that is generally attributed


to the insalubrity of the climate.(3*)


    Vigour depends partly on race qualities: but these, so far as


they can be explained at all, seem to be chiefly due to


climate.(4*)





    3. Climate has also a large share in determining the


necessaries of life; the first of which is food. Much depends on


the proper preparation of food; and a skilled housewife with ten


shillings a week to spend on food will often do more for the


health and strength of her family than an unskilled one with


twenty. The great mortality of infants among the poor is largely


due to the want of care and judgment in preparing their food; and


those who do not entirely succumb to this want of motherly care


often grow up with enfeebled constitutions.


    In all ages of the world except the present, want of food has


caused wholesale destruction of the people. Even in London in the


seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the mortality was eight per


cent greater in years of dear corn than in years of cheap


corn.(5*) But gradually the effects of increased wealth and


improved means of communication are making themselves felt nearly


all over the world; the severity of famines is mitigated even in


such a country as India; and they are unknown in Europe and in


the New World. In England now want of food is scarcely ever the


direct cause of death: but it is a frequent cause of that general


weakening of the system which renders it unable to resist


disease; and it is a chief cause of industrial inefficiency.


    We have already seen that the necessaries for efficiency vary


with the nature of the work to be done, but we must now examine


this subject a little more closely.


    As regards muscular work in particular there is a close


connection between the supply of food that a man has, and his


available strength. If the work is intermittent, as that of some


dock labourers, a cheap but nutritious grain diet is sufficient.


But for very heavy continuous strain such as is involved in


puddlers' and the hardest navvies' work, food is required which


can be digested and assimilated even when the body is tired. This


quality is still more essential in the food of the higher grades


of labour, whose work involves great nervous strain; though the


quantity required by them is generally small.


    After food, the next necessaries of life and labour are


clothing, house-room and firing. When they are deficient, the


mind becomes torpid, and ultimately the physical constitution is


undermined. When clothing is very scanty, it is generally worn


night and day; and the skin is allowed to be enclosed in a crust


of dirt. A deficiency of house-room, or of fuel, causes people to


live in a vitiated atmosphere which is injurious to health and


vigour; and not the least of the benefits which English people


derive from the cheapness of coal, is the habit, peculiar to


them, of having well-ventilated rooms even in cold weather.


Badly-built houses with imperfect drainage cause diseases which


even in their slighter forms weaken vitality in a wonderful way;


and overcrowding leads to moral evils which diminish the numbers


and lower the character of the people.


    Rest is as essential for the growth of a vigorous population


as the more material necessaries of food, clothing, etc. Overwork


of every form lowers vitality; while anxiety, worry, and


excessive mental strain have a fatal influence in undermining the


constitution, in impairing fecundity and diminishing the vigour


of the race.





    4. Next come three closely allied conditions of vigour,


namely, hopefulness, freedom, and change. All history is full of


the record of inefficiency caused in varying degrees by slavery,


serfdom, and other forms of civil and political oppression and


repression.(6*)


    In all ages colonies have been apt to outstrip their mother


countries in vigour and energy. This has been due partly to the


abundance of land and the cheapness of necessaries at their


command; partly to that natural selection of the strongest


characters for a life of adventure, and partly to physiological


causes connected with the mixture of races: but perhaps the most


important cause of all is to be found in the hope, the freedom


and the changefulness of their lives.(7*)


    Freedom so far has been regarded as freedom from external


bonds. But that higher freedom, which comes of self-mastery, is


an even more important condition for the highest work. The


elevation of the ideals of life on which this depends, is due on


the one side to political and economic causes, and on the other


to personal and religious influences; among which the influence


of the mother in early childhood is supreme.





    5. Bodily and mental health and strength are much influenced


by occupation.(8*) At the beginning of this century the


conditions of factory work were needlessly unhealthy and


oppressive for all, and especially for young children. But


Factory and Education Acts have removed the worst of these evils


from factories; though many of them still linger about domestic


industries and the smaller workshops.


    The higher wages, the greater intelligence, and the better


medical facilities of townspeople should cause infant mortality


to be much lower among them than in the country. But it is


generally higher, especially where there are many mothers who


neglect their family duties in order to earn money wages.





    6. In almost all countries there is a constant migration


towards the towns.(9*) The large towns and especially London


absorb the very best blood from all the rest of England; the most


enterprising, the most highly gifted, those with the highest


physique. and the strongest characters go there to find scope for


their abilities. An increasing number of those who are most


capable and have most strength of character, live in suburbs,


where excellent systems of drainage, water supply and lighting,


together with good schools and opportunities for open air play,


give conditions at least as conducive to vigour as are to be


found in the country; and though there are still many town


districts only a little less injurious to vitality than were


large towns generally some time ago, yet on the whole the


increasing density of population seems to be for the present a


diminishing source of danger. The recent rapid growth of


facilities for living far from the chief centres of industry and


trade must indeed slacken in time. But there seems no sign of any


slackening in the movement of industries outwards to suburbs and


even to new Garden Cities to seek and to bring with them vigorous


workers.


    Statistical averages are indeed unduly favourable to urban


conditions, partly because many of the town influences which


lower vigour do not much affect mortality; and partly because the


majority of immigrants into the towns are in the full strength of


youth, and of more than average energy and courage; while young


people whose parents live in the country generally go home when


they become seriously ill.(10*)


    There is no better use for public and private money than in


providing public parks and playgrounds in large cities, in


contracting with railways to increase the number of the workmen's


trains run by them, and in helping those of the working classes


who are willing to leave the large towns to do so, and to take


their industries with them.(11*)





    7. And there are yet other causes for anxiety. For there is


some partial arrest of that selective influence of struggle and


competition which in the earlier stages of civilization caused


those who were strongest and most vigorous to leave the largest


progeny behind them; and to which, more than any other single


cause, the progress of the human race is due. In the later stages


of civilization the rule has indeed long been that the upper


classes marry late, and in consequence have fewer children than


the working classes: but this has been compensated for by the


fact that among the working classes themselves the old rule was


held; and the vigour of the nation that is tending to be damped


out among the upper classes is thus replenished by the fresh


stream of strength that is constantly welling up from below. But


in France for a long time, and recently in America, and England,


some of the abler and more intelligent of the working class


population have shown signs of a disinclination to have large


families; and this is a source of danger.(12*)


    Thus there are increasing reasons for fearing, that while the


progress of medical science and sanitation is saving from death a


continually increasing number of the children of those who are


feeble physically and mentally; many of those who are most


thoughtful and best endowed with energy, enterprise and


self-control are tending to defer their marriages and in other


ways to limit the number of children whom they leave behind them.


The motive is sometimes selfish, and perhaps it is best that hard


and frivolous people should leave but few descendants of their


own type. But more often it is a desire to secure a good social


position for their children. This desire contains many elements


that fall short of the highest ideals of human aims, and in some


cases, a few that are distinctly base; but after all it has been


one of the chief factors of progress, and those who are affected


by it include many of those whose children would probably be


among the best and strongest of the race.


    It must be remembered that the members of a large family


educate one another, they are usually more genial and bright,


often more vigorous in every way than the members of a small


family. Partly, no doubt, this is because their parents were of


unusual vigour; and for a like reason they in their turn are


likely to have large and vigorous families. The progress of the


race is due to a much greater extent than appears at first sight


to the descendants of a few exceptionally large and vigorous


families.


    But on the other hand there is no doubt that the parents can


often do better in many ways for a small family than a large one.


Other things being equal, an increase in the number of children


who are born causes an increase of infantile mortality; and that


is an unmixed evil. The birth of children who die early from want


of care and adequate means is a useless strain to the mother and


an injury to the rest of the family.(13*)





    8. There are other considerations of which account ought to


be taken; but so far as the points discussed in this chapter are


concerned, it seems prima facie advisable that people should not


bring children into the world till they can see their way to


giving them at least as good an education both physical and


mental as they themselves had; and that it is best to marry


moderately early provided there is sufficient self-control to


keep the family within the requisite bounds without transgressing


moral laws. The general adoption of these principles of action,


combined with an adequate provision of fresh air and of healthy


play for our town populations, could hardly fail to cause the


strength and vigour of the race to improve. And we shall


presently find reasons for believing that if the strength and


vigour of the race improves, the increase of numbers will not for


a long time to come cause a diminution of the average real income


of the people.


    Thus then the progress of knowledge, and in particular of


medical science, the ever-growing activity and wisdom of


Government in all matters relating to health, and the increase of


material wealth, all tend to lessen mortality and to increase


health and strength, and to lengthen life. On the other hand,


vitality is lowered and the death-rate raised by the rapid


increase of town life, and by the tendency of the higher strains


of the population to marry later and to have fewer children than


the lower. If the former set of causes were alone in action, but


so regulated as to avoid the danger of over-population, it is


probable that man would quickly rise to a physical and mental


excellence superior to any that the world has yet known; while if


the latter set acted unchecked, he would speedily degenerate.


    As it is, the two sets hold one another very nearly in


balance, the former slightly preponderating. While the population


of England is growing nearly as fast as ever, those who are out


of health in body or mind are certainly not an increasing part of


the whole: the rest are much better fed and clothed, and, except


in over-crowded industrial districts, are generally growing in


strength. The average duration of life both for men and women has


been increasing steadily for many years.





NOTES:





1. This measure can be applied directly to most kinds of navvies'


and porters' work, and indirectly to many kinds of agricultural


work. In a controversy that was waged after the great


agricultural lock out as to the relative efficiency of unskilled


labour in the South and North of England, the most trustworthy


measure was found in the number of tons of material that a man


would load into a cart in a day. Other measures have been found


in the number of acres reaped or mown, or the number of bushels


of corn reaped, etc.: but these are unsatisfactory, particularly


for comparing different conditions of agriculture: since the


implements used, the nature of the crop and the mode of doing the


work all vary widely. Thus nearly all comparisons between


medieval and modern work and wages based on the wages of reaping,


mowing, etc. are valueless until we have found means to allow for


the effects of changes in the methods of agriculture. It costs


for instance less labour than it did to reap by hand a crop that


yields a hundred bushels of corn; because the implements used are


better than they were: but it may not cost less labour to reap an


acre of corn; because the crops are heavier than they were.


    In backward countries, particularly where there is not much


use of horses or other draught animals, a great part of men's and


women's work may be measured fairly well by the muscular exertion


involved in it. But in England less than one-sixth of the


industrial classes are now engaged on work of this kind; while


the force exerted by steam-engines alone is more than twenty


times as much as could be exerted by the muscles of all


Englishmen.





2. This must be distinguished from nervousness, which, as a rule,


indicates a general deficiency of nervous strength; though


sometimes it proceeds from nervous irritability or want of


balance. A man who has great nervous strength in some directions


may have but little in others; the artistic temperament in


particular often develops one set of nerves at the expense of


others: but it is the weakness of some of the nerves, not the


strength of the others, that leads to nervousness. The most


perfect artistic natures seem not to have been nervous: Leonardo


da Vinci and Shakespeare for example. The term "nervous strength"


corresponds in some measure to Heart in Engel's great division of


the elements of efficiency into (a) Body, (b) Reason, and (c)


Heart (Leib, Verstand und Herz). He classifies activities


according to the permutations a, ab, ac, abc, acb, b, ba, bc,


bca, bac; c, ca, cb, cab, cba: the order in each case being that


of relative importance, and a letter being omitted where the


corresponding element plays only a very small part.


    In the war of 1870 Berlin University students, who seemed to


be weaker than the average soldier, were found to be able to bear


fatigue better.





3. A warm climate impairs vigour. It is not altogether hostile to


high intellectual and artistic work: but it prevents people from


being able to endure very hard exertion of any kind for a long


time. More sustained hard work can be done in the cooler half of


the temperate zone than anywhere else; and most of all in places


such as England and her counterpart New Zealand, where


sea-breezes keep the temperature nearly uniform. The summer heats


and winter colds of many parts of Europe and America, where the


mean temperature is moderate, have the effect of shortening the


year for working purposes by about two months. Extreme and


sustained cold is found to dull the energies, partly perhaps


because it causes people to spend much of their time in close and


confined quarters: inhabitants of the Arctic regions are


generally incapable of long-continued severe exertion. In England


popular opinion has insisted that a "warm Yule tide makes fat


churchyard"; but statistics prove beyond question that it has the


opposite effect: the average mortality is highest in the coldest


quarter of the year, and higher in cold winters than in warm.





4. Race history is a fascinating but disappointing study for the


economist: for conquering races generally incorporated the women


of the conquered; they often carried with them many slaves of


both sexes during their migrations, and slaves were less likely


than freemen to be killed in battle or to adopt a monastic life.


In consequence nearly every race had much servile, that is mixed


blood in it: and as the share of servile blood was largest in the


industrial classes, a race history of industrial habits seems


impossible.





5. This was proved by Farr, who eliminated disturbing causes by


an instructive statistical device (Vital Statistics, p. 139).





6. Freedom and hope increase not only man's willingness but also


his power for work; physiologists tell us that a given exertion


consumes less of the store of nervous energy if done under the


stimulus of pleasure than of pain: and without hope there is no


enterprise. Security of person and property are two conditions of


this hopefulness and freedom; but security always involves


restraints on freedom, and it is one of the most difficult


problems of civilization to discover how to obtain the security


which is a condition of freedom without too great a sacrifice of


freedom itself. Changes of work, of scene, and of personal


associations bring new thoughts, call attention to the


imperfections of old methods, stimulate a "divine discontent,"


and in every way develop creative energy.





7. By converse with others who come from different places, and


have different Customs, travellers learn to put on its trial many


a habit of thought or action which otherwise they would have


always acquiesced in as though it were a law of nature. Moreover,


a shifting of places enables the more powerful and original minds


to find full scope for their energies and to rise to important


positions: whereas those who stay at home are often over much


kept in their places. Few men are prophets in their own land;


neighbours and relations are generally the last to pardon the


faults and to recognize the merits of those who are less docile


and more enterprising than those around them. It is doubtless


chiefly for this reason that in almost every part of England a


disproportionately large share of the best energy and enterprise


is to be found among those who were born elsewhere.


    But change may be carried to excess; and when population


shifts so rapidly, that a man is always shaking himself loose


from his reputation, he loses some of the best external aids to


the formation of a high moral character. The extreme hopefulness


and restlessness of those who wander to new countries lead to


much waste of effort in half acquiring technical skill, and half


finishing tasks which are speedily abandoned in favour of some


new occupation.





8. The rate of mortality is low among ministers of religion and


schoolmasters; among the agricultural classes, and in some other


industries such as those of wheelwrights, shipwrights and coal


miners. It is high in lead and tin mining, in file-making and


earthenware manufacture. But neither these nor any other regular


trade show as high a rate of mortality as is found among London


general labourers and costermongers; while the highest of all is


that of servants in inns. Such occupations are not directly


injurious to health, but they attract those who are weak in


physique and in character and they encourage irregular habits. A


good account of the influence of occupation on death-rates is


given in the supplement to the forty-fifth (1885) Annual Report


of the Registrar-General, pp. xxv-lxiii. See also Farr's Vital


Statistics, pp. 392-411, Humphreys' paper on Class Mortality


Statistics in the Statistical Journal for June 1887, and the


literature of the Factory Acts generally.





9. Davenant (Balance of Trade, A.D. 1699, p. 20), following


Gregory King, proves that according to official figures London


has an excess of deaths over births of 2000 a year, but an


immigration of 5000; which is more than half of what he


calculates, by a rather risky method, to be the true net increase


of the population of the country. He reckons that 530,000 people


live in London, 870,000 in the other cities and market towns, and


4,100,000 in villages and hamlets. Compare these figures with the


census of 1901 for England and Wales; where we find London with a


population of over 4,500,000; five more towns with an average of


over 500,000; and sixty-nine more exceeding 50,000 with an


average of over 100,000. Nor is this all: for many suburbs whose


population is not counted in, are often really parts of the big


towns; and in some cases the suburbs of several adjacent towns


run into one another, making them all into one gigantic, though


rather scattered town. A suburb of Manchester is counted as a


large town with 220,000 inhabitants; and the same is true of West


Ham, a suburb of London with 275,000. The boundaries of some


large towns are extended at irregular intervals to include such


suburbs: and consequently the true population of a large town may


be growing fast, while its nominal population grows slowly or


even recedes, and then suddenly leaps forwards. Thus the nominal


population of Liverpool was 552,000 in 1881; 518,000 in 1891; and


685,000 in 1901.


    Similar changes are taking place elsewhere. Thus the


population of Paris has grown twelve times as fast during the


nineteenth century as that of France. The towns of Germany are


increasing at the expense of the country by one half per cent. of


the population yearly. In the United States there was in 1800 no


town with more than 75,000 inhabitants; in 1905 there were three


which together contained more than 7,000,000 and eleven more with


above 300,000 each. More than a third of the population of


Victoria are collected in Melbourne.


    It must be recollected that the characteristics of town life


increase in intensity for good and for evil with every increase


in the size of a town, and its suburbs. Fresh country air has to


pass over many more sources of noisome vapour before it reaches


the average Londoner than before it reaches the average


inhabitant of a small town. The Londoner has generally to go far


before he can reach the freedom and the restful sounds and sights


of the country. London therefore with 4,500,000 inhabitants adds


to the urban character of England's life far more than a hundred


times as much as a town of 45,000 inhabitants.





10. For reasons of this kind Welton (Statistical Journal, 1897)


makes the extreme proposal to omit all persons between 15 and 35


years of age in comparing the rates of mortality in different


towns. The mortality of females in London between the ages of


fifteen and thirty-five is, chiefly for this reason, abnormally


low. If however a town has a stationary population its vital


statistics are more easily interpreted; and selecting Coventry as


a typical town, Galton has calculated that the adult children of


artisan townsfolk are little more than half as numerous as those


of labouring people who live in healthy country districts. When a


place is decaying, the young and strong and hearty drift away


from it; leaving the old and the infirm behind them, and


consequently the birth-rate is generally low. On the other hand,


a centre of industry that is attracting population is likely to


have a very high birth-rate, because it has more than its share


of people in the full vigour of life. This is especially the case


in the coal and iron towns, partly because they do not suffer, as


the textile towns do, from a deficiency of males; and partly


because miners as a class marry early. In some of them, though


the death-rate is high, the excess of the birth-rate over it


exceeds 20 per thousand of the population. The death rate is


generally highest in towns of the second order, chiefly because


their sanitary arrangements are not yet as good as those of the


very largest towns.


    Prof. Haycraft (Darwinism and Race Progress) argues in the


opposite direction. He lays just stress on the dangers to the


human race which would result from a diminution of those


diseases, such as phthisis and scrofula, which attack chiefly


people of weak constitution, and thus exercise a selective


influence on the race, unless it were accompanied by


corresponding improvements in other directions. But phthisis does


not kill all its victims; there is some net gain in a diminution


of its power of weakening them.





11. See an article entitled "Where to House the London Poor" by


the present writer in the Contemporary Review, Feb. 1884.





12. In the Southern States of America, manual work became


disgraceful to the white man; so that, if unable to have slaves


himself, he led a paltry degenerate life, and seldom married.


Again, on the Pacific Slope, there were at one time just grounds


for fearing that all but highly skilled work would be left to the


Chinese; and that the white men would live in an artificial way


in which a family became a great expense. In this case Chinese


lives would have been substituted for American, and the average


quality of the human race would have been lowered.





13. The extent of the infant mortality that arises from


preventable causes may be inferred from the facts that the


percentage of deaths under one year of age to births is generally


about a third as much again in urban as in rural districts; and


yet in many urban districts which have a well-to-do population it


is lower than the average for the whole country (Registrar


General's Report for 1905, pp. xlii-xlv). A few years ago it was


found that, while the annual death rate of children under five


years of age was only about two per cent in the families of peers


and was less than three per cent for the whole of the upper


classes, it was between six and seven per cent for the whole of


England. On the other hand Prof Leroy Beaulieu says that in


France the parents of but one or two children are apt to indulge


them, and be over-careful about them to the detriment of their


boldness, enterprise and endurance. (See Statistical Journal,


Vol. 54, pp. 378-9.)





Chapter 6





Industrial Training





    1. Having discussed the causes which govern the growth of a


numerous and vigorous population, we have next to consider the


training that is required to develop its industrial efficiency.


    The natural vigour that enables a man to attain great success


in any one pursuit would generally have served him in good stead


in almost any other. But there are exceptions. Some people, for


instance, seem to be fitted from birth for an artistic career,


and for no other; and occasionally a man of great practical


genius is found to be almost devoid of artistic sensibility. But


a race that has great nervous strength seems generally able,


under favourable conditions, to develop in the course of a few


generations ability of almost any kind that it holds in specially


high esteem. A race that has acquired vigour in war or in the


ruder forms of industry sometimes gains intellectual and artistic


power of a high order very quickly; and nearly every literary and


artistic epoch of classical and medieval times has been due to a


people of great nervous strength, who have been brought into


contact with noble thoughts before they have acquired much taste


for artificial comforts and luxuries.


    The growth of this taste in our own age has prevented us from


taking full advantage of the opportunities our largely increased


resources give us of consecrating the greater part of the highest


abilities of the race to the highest aims. But perhaps the


intellectual vigour of the age appears less than it really is, in


consequence of the growth of scientific pursuits. For in art and


literature success is often achieved while genius still wears the


fascinating aspect of youth; but in modern science so much


knowledge is required for originality, that before a student can


make his mark in the world, his mind has often lost the first


bloom of its freshness; and further the real value of his work is


not often patent to the multitude as that of a picture or poem


generally is.(1*) In the same way the solid qualities of the


modern machine-tending artisan are rated more cheaply than the


lighter virtues of the medieval handicraftsman. This is partly


because we are apt to regard as commonplace those excellences


which are common in our own time; and to overlook the fact that


the term "unskilled labourer" is constantly changing its meaning.





    2. Very backward races are unable to keep on at any kind of


work for a long time; and even the simplest form of what we


regard as unskilled work is skilled work relatively to them; for


they have not the requisite assiduity, and they can acquire it


only by a long course of training. But where education is


universal, an occupation may fairly be classed as unskilled,


though it requires a knowledge of reading and writing. Again, in


districts in which manufactures have long been domiciled, a habit


of responsibility, of carefulness and promptitude in handling


expensive machinery and materials becomes the common property of


all; and then much of the work of tending machinery is said to be


entirely mechanical and unskilled, and to call forth no human


faculty that is worthy of esteem. But in fact it is probable that


not one-tenth of the present populations of the world have the


mental and moral faculties, the intelligence, and, the


self-control that are required for it: perhaps not one-half could


be made to do the work well by steady training for two


generations. Even of a manufacturing population only a small part


are capable of doing many of the tasks that appear at first sight


to be entirely monotonous. Machine-weaving, for instance, simple


as it seems, is divided into higher and lower grades; and most of


those who work in the lower grades have not "the stuff in them"


that is required for weaving with several colours. And the


differences are even greater in industries that deal with hard


materials, wood, metals, or ceramics.


    Some kinds of manual work require long-continued practice in


one set of operations, but these cases are not very common, and


they are becoming rarer: for machinery is constantly taking over


work that requires manual skill of this kind. It is indeed true


that a general command over the use of one's fingers is a very


important element of industrial efficiency; but this is the


result chiefly of nervous strength, and self-mastery. It is of


course developed by training, but the greater part of this may be


of a general character and not special to the particular


occupation; just as a good cricketer soon learns to play tennis


well, so a skilled artisan can often move into other trades


without any great and lasting loss of efficiency.


    Manual skill that is so specialized that it is quite


incapable of being transferred from one occupation to another is


becoming steadily a less and less important factor in production.


Putting aside for the present the faculties of artistic


perception and artistic creation, we may say that what makes one


occupation higher than another, what makes the workers of one


town or country more efficient than those of another, is chiefly


a superiority in general sagacity and energy which are not


specialized to any one occupation.


    To be able to bear in mind many things at a time, to have


everything ready when wanted, to act promptly and show resource


when anything goes wrong, to accommodate oneself quickly to


changes in detail of the work done, to be steady and trustworthy,


to have always a reserve of force which will come out in


emergency, these are the qualities which make a great industrial


people. They are not peculiar to any occupation, but are wanted


in all; and if they cannot always be easily transferred from one


trade to other kindred trades, the chief reason is that they


require to be supplemented by some knowledge of materials and


familiarity with special processes.


    We may then use the term general ability to denote those


faculties and that general knowledge and intelligence which are


in varying degrees the common property of all the higher grades


of industry; while that manual dexterity and that acquaintance


with particular materials and processes which are required for


the special purposes of individual trades may be classed as


specialized ability.





    3. General ability depends largely on the surroundings of


childhood and youth. In this the first and far the most powerful


influence is that of the mother.(2*) Next comes the influence of


the father, of other children, and in some cases of servants.(3*)


As years pass on the child of the working man learns a great deal


from what he sees and hears going on around him; and when we


inquire into the advantages for starting in life which children


of the well-to-do classes have over those of artisans, and which


these in their turn have over the children of unskilled


labourers, we shall have to consider these influences of home


more in detail. But at present we may pass to consider the more


general influences of school education.


    Little need be said of general education; though the


influence even of that on industrial efficiency is greater than


it appears. It is true that. the children of the working classes


must very often leave school, when they have but learnt the


elements of reading, writing, arithmetic and drawing; and it is


sometimes argued that part of the little time spent on these


subjects would be better given to practical work. But the advance


made at school is important not so much on its own account, as


for the power of future advance which a school education gives.


For a truly liberal general education adapts the mind to use its


best faculties in business and to use business itself as a means


of increasing culture; though it does not concern itself with the


details of particular trades: that is left for technical


education.(4*)





    4. Technical education has in like manner raised its aims in


recent years. It used to mean little more than imparting that


manual dexterity and that elementary knowledge of machinery and


processes which an intelligent lad quickly picks up for himself


when his work has begun; though if he has learnt it beforehand,


he can perhaps earn a few shillings more at starting than if he


had been quite ignorant. But such so-called education does not


develop faculties; it rather hinders them from being developed. A


lad, who has picked up the knowledge for himself, has educated


himself by so doing; and he is likely to make better progress in


the future than one who has been taught in a school of this


old-fashioned kind. Technical education is however outgrowing its


mistakes; and is aiming, firstly, at giving a general command


over the use of eyes and fingers (though there are signs that


this work is being taken over by general education, to which it


properly belongs); and secondly at imparting artistic skill and


knowledge, and methods of investigation, which are useful in


particular occupations, but are seldom properly acquired in the


course of practical work. It is however to be remembered that


every advance in the accuracy and versatility of automatic


machinery narrows the range of manual work in which command over


hand and eye is at a high premium; and that those faculties which


are trained by general education in its best forms are ever


rising in importance.(5*)


    According to the best English opinions, technical education


for the higher ranks of industry should keep the aim of


developing the faculties almost as constantly before it as


general education does. It should rest on the same basis as a


thorough general education, but should go on to work out in


detail special branches of knowledge for the benefit of


particular trades.(6*) Our aim should be to add the scientific


training in which the countries of Western Europe are ahead of us


to that daring and restless energy and those practical instincts,


which seldom flourish unless the best years of youth are spent in


the workshop; recollecting always that whatever a youth learns


for himself by direct experience in well-conducted works, teaches


him more and stimulates his mental activity more than if it were


taught him by a master in a technical school with model


instruments.(7*)


    The old apprenticeship system is not exactly suited to modern


conditions and it has fallen into disuse; but a substitute for it


is wanted. Within the last few years many of the ablest


manufacturers have begun to set the fashion of making their sons


work through every stage in succession of the business they will


ultimately have to control; but this splendid education can be


had only by a few. So many and various are the branches of any


great modern industry that it would be impossible for the


employers to undertake, as they used to do, that every youth


committed to their care should learn all; and indeed a lad of


ordinary ability would be bewildered by the attempt. But it does


not seem impracticable to revive the apprenticeship system in a


modified form.(8*)


    The great epoch-making inventions in industry came till


recently almost exclusively from England. But now other nations


are joining in the race. The excellence of the common schools of


the Americans, the variety of their lives, the interchange of


ideas between different races among them, and the peculiar


conditions of their agriculture have developed a restless spirit


of inquiry; while technical education is now being pushed on with


great vigour. On the other hand, the diffusion of scientific


knowledge among the middle and even the working classes of


Germany, combined with their familiarity with modern languages


and their habits of travelling in pursuit of instruction, has


enabled them to keep up with English and American mechanics and


to take the lead in many of the applications of chemistry to


business.(9*)





    5. It is true that there are many kinds of work which can be


done as efficiently by an uneducated as by an educated workman:


and that the higher branches of education are of little direct


use except to employers and foremen and a comparatively small


number of artisans. But a good education confers great indirect


benefits even on the ordinary workman. It stimulates his mental


activity; it fosters in him a habit of wise inquisitiveness; it


makes him more intelligent, more ready, more trustworthy in his


ordinary work; it raises the tone of his life in working hours


and out of working hours; it is thus an important means towards


the production of material wealth; at the same time that,


regarded as an end in itself, it is inferior to none of those


which the production of material wealth can be made to subserve.


    We must however look in another direction for a part, perhaps


the greater part, of the immediate economic gain which the nation


may derive from an improvement in the general and technical


education of the mass of the people. We must look not so much at


those who stay in the rank and file of the working classes, as at


those who rise from a humble birth to join the higher ranks of


skilled artisans, to become foremen or employers, to advance the


boundaries of science, or possibly to add to the national wealth


in art and literature.


    The laws which govern the birth of genius are inscrutable. It


is probable that the percentage of children of the working


classes who are endowed with natural abilities of the highest


order is not so great as that of the children of people who have


attained or have inherited a higher position in society. But


since the manual labour classes are four or five times as


numerous as all other classes put together, it is not unlikely


that more than half the best natural genius that is born into the


country belongs to them; and of this a great part is fruitless


for want of opportunity. There is no extravagance more


prejudicial to the growth of national wealth than that wasteful


negligence which allows genius that happens to be born of lowly


parentage to expend itself in lowly work. No change would conduce


so much to a rapid increase of material wealth as an improvement


in our schools, and especially those of the middle grades,


provided it be combined with an extensive system of scholarships,


which will enable the clever son of a working man to rise


gradually from school to school till he has the best theoretical


and practical education which the age can give.


    To the abilities of children of the working classes may be


ascribed the greater part of the success of the free towns in the


Middle Ages and of Scotland in recent times. Even within England


itself there is a lesson of the same kind to be learnt: progress


is most rapid in those parts of the country in which the greatest


proportion of the leaders of industry are the sons of working


men. For instance, the beginning of the manufacturing era found


social distinctions more closely marked and more firmly


established in the South than in the North of England. In the


South something of a spirit of caste has held back the working


men and the sons of working men from rising to posts of command;


and the old established families have been wanting in that


elasticity and freshness of mind which no social advantages can


supply, and which comes only from natural gifts. This spirit of


caste, and this deficiency of new blood among the leaders of


industry, have mutually sustained one another; and there are not


a few towns in the South of England whose decadence within living


memory can be traced in a great measure to this cause.





    6. Education in art stands on a somewhat different footing


from education in hard thinking: for while the latter nearly


always strengthens the character, the former not unfrequently


fails to do this. Nevertheless the development of the artistic


faculties of the people is in itself an aim of the very highest


importance, and is becoming a chief factor of industrial


efficiency.


    We are here concerned almost exclusively with those branches


of art which appeal to the eye. For though literature and music


contribute as much and more to the fulness of life, yet their


development does not directly affect, and does not depend upon,


the methods of business, the processes of manufacture and the


skill of artisans.


    The artisan of Europe in the Middle Ages, and of eastern


countries now, has perhaps obtained credit for more originality


than he has really possessed. Eastern carpets, for instance, are


full of grand conceptions: but if we examine a great many


examples of the art of any one place, selected perhaps from the


work of several centuries, we often find very little variety in


their fundamental ideas. But in the modern era of rapid changes


-- some caused by fashion and some by the beneficial movements of


industrial and social progress -- everyone feels free to make a


new departure, everyone has to rely in the main on his own


resources: there is no slowly matured public criticism to guide


him.(10*)


    This is however not the only, perhaps not the chief


disadvantage under which artistic design labours in our own age.


There is no good reason for believing that the children of


ordinary workmen in the Middle Ages had more power of artistic


origination than those of ordinary village carpenters or


blacksmiths of to-day; but if one among ten thousand happened to


have genius, it found vent in his work and was stimulated by the


competition of the gilds and in other ways. But the modern


artisan is apt to be occupied in the management of machinery; and


though the faculties which he develops may be more solid and may


help more in the long run towards the highest progress of the


human race, than did the taste and fancy of his medieval


predecessor, yet they do not contribute directly towards the


progress of art. And if he should find in himself a higher order


of ability than among his fellows, he will probably endeavour to


take a leading part in the management of a trades-union or some


other society, or to collect together a little store of capital


and to rise out of that trade in which he was educated. These are


not ignoble aims; but his ambition would perhaps have been nobler


and more fruitful of good to the world, if he had stayed in his


old trade and striven to create works of beauty which should live


after he had gone.


    It must however be admitted that he would have great


difficulties in doing this. The shortness of the time which we


allow ourselves for changes in the arts of decoration is scarcely


a greater evil than the width of the area of the world over which


they are spread; for that causes a further distraction of the


hasty and hurried efforts of the designer, by compelling him to


be always watching the world movements of the supply of and


demand for art products. This is a task for which the artisan,


who works with his own hands, is not well fitted; and in


consequence now-a-days the ordinary artisan finds it best to


follow and not to lead. Even the supreme skill of the Lyons


weaver shows itself now almost exclusively in an inherited power


of delicate manipulation, and fine perception of colour, that


enable him to carry out perfectly the ideas of professional


designers.


    Increasing wealth is enabling people to buy things of all


kinds to suit the fancy, with but a secondary regard to their


powers of wearing; so that in all kinds of clothing and furniture


it is every day more true that it is the pattern which sells the


things. The influence of the late William Morris and others,


combined with the lead which many English designers have derived


from Oriental and especially Persian and Indian masters of colour


is acknowledged by Frenchmen themselves to have attained the


first rank for certain classes of English fabrics and decorative


products. But in other directions France is supreme. Some English


manufacturers who hold their own against the world would, it is


said, be driven out of the market if they had to depend on


English patterns. This is partly due to the fact that Paris


having the lead in fashions, as the result of an inherited quick


and subtle taste in women's dress, a Parisian design is likely to


be in harmony with the coming fashions and to sell better than a


design of equal intrinsic worth from elsewhere.(11*)


    Technical education, then, though it cannot add much directly


to the supply of genius in art, any more than it can in science


or in business, can yet save much natural artistic genius from


running to waste; and it is called on to do this all the more


because the training that was given by the older forms of


handicraft can never be revived on a large scale.(12*)





    7. We may then conclude that the wisdom of expending public


and private funds on education is not to be measured by its


direct fruits alone. It will be profitable as a mere investment,


to give the masses of the people much greater opportunities than


they can generally avail themselves of. For by this means many,


who would have died unknown, are enabled to get the start needed


for bringing out their latent abilities. And the economic value


of one great industrial genius is sufficient to cover the


expenses of the education of a whole town; for one new idea, such


as Bessemer's chief invention, adds as much to England's


productive power as the labour of a hundred thousand men. Less


direct, but not less in importance, is the aid given to


production by medical discoveries such as those of Jenner or


Pasteur, which increase our health and working power; and again


by scientific work such as that of mathematics or biology, even


though many generations may pass away before it bears visible


fruit in greater material well-being. All that is spent during


many years in opening the means of higher education to the masses


would be well paid for if it called out one more Newton or


Darwin, Shakespeare or Beethoven.


    There are few practical problems in which the economist has a


more direct interest than those relating to the principles on


which the expense of the education of children should be divided


between the State and the parents. But we must now consider the


conditions that determine the power and the will of the parents


to bear their share of the expense, whatever it may be.


    Most parents are willing enough to do for their children what


their own parents did for them; and perhaps even to go a little


beyond it if they find themselves among neighbours who happen to


have a rather higher standard. But to do more than this requires,


in addition to the moral qualities of unselfishness and a warmth


of affection that are perhaps not rare, a certain habit of mind


which is as yet not very common. It requires the habit of


distinctly realizing the future, of regarding a distant event as


of nearly the same importance as if it were close at hand


(discounting the future at a low rate of interest); this habit is


at once a chief product and a chief cause of civilization, and is


seldom fully. developed except among the middle and upper classes


of the more cultivated nations.





    8. Parents generally bring up their children to occupations


in their own grade, and therefore the total supply of labour in


any grade in one generation is in a great measure determined by


the numbers in that grade in the preceding generation, yet within


the grade itself there is greater. mobility. If the advantages of


any one occupation in it rise above the average, there is a quick


influx of youth from other occupations within the grade. The


vertical movement from one grade to another is seldom very rapid


or on a very large scale; but, when the advantages of a grade


have risen relatively to the difficulty of the work required of


it, many small streams of labour, both youthful and adult, will


begin to flow towards it; and though none of them may be very


large, they will together have a sufficient volume to satisfy


before long the increased demand for labour in that grade.


    We must defer to a later stage a fuller discussion of the


obstacles which the conditions of any place and time oppose to


the free mobility of labour, and also of the inducements which


they offer to anyone to change his occupation or to bring up his


son to an occupation different from his own. But we have seen


enough to conclude that, other things being equal, an increase in


the earnings that are to be got by labour increases its rate of


growth; or, in other words, a rise in its demand price increases


the supply of it. If the state of knowledge, and of ethical,


social and domestic habits be given; then the vigour of the


people as a whole if not their numbers, and both the numbers and


vigour of any trade in particular, may be said to have a supply


price in this sense, that there is a certain level of the demand


price which will keep them stationary; that a higher price would


cause them to increase, and that a lower price would cause them


to decrease. Thus economic causes play a part in governing the


growth of population as a whole as well as the supply of labour


in any particular grade. But their influence on the numbers of


the population as a whole is largely indirect; and is exerted by


way of the ethical, social and domestic habits of life. For these


habits are themselves influenced by economic causes deeply,


though slowly, and in ways some of which are difficult to trace,


and impossible to predict.(13*)





NOTES:





1. In this connection it is worth while to notice that the full


importance of an epoch-making idea is often not perceived in the


generation in which it is made: it starts the thoughts of the


world on a new track, but the change of direction is not obvious


until the turning-point has been left some way behind. In the


same way the mechanical inventions of every age are apt to be


underrated relatively to those of earlier times. For a new


discovery is seldom fully effective for practical purposes till


many minor improvements and subsidiary discoveries have gathered


themselves around it: an invention that makes an epoch is very


often a generation older than the epoch which it makes. Thus it


is that each generation seems to be chiefly occupied in working


out the thoughts of the preceding one; while the full importance


of its own thoughts is as yet not clearly seen.





2. According to Galton the statement that all great men have had


great mothers goes too far: but that shows only that the mother's


influence does not outweigh all others; not that it is not


greater than any one of them. He says that the mother's influence


is most easily traceable among theologians and men of science,


because an earnest mother leads her child to feel deeply about


great things; and a thoughtful mother does not repress, but


encourages that childish curiosity which is the raw material of


scientific habits of thought.





3. There are many fine natures among domestic servants. But those


who live in very rich houses are apt to get self-indulgent


habits, to overestimate the importance of wealth, and generally


to put the lower aims of life above the higher, in a way that is


not common with independent working people. The company in which


the children of some of our best houses spend much of their time,


is less ennobling than that of the average cottage. Yet in these


very houses, no servant who is not specially qualified, is


allowed to take charge of a young retriever or a young horse.





4. The absence of a careful general education for the children of


the working classes, has been hardly less detrimental to


industrial progress than the narrow range of the old


grammar-school education of the middle classes. Till recently


indeed it was the only one by which the average schoolmaster


could induce his pupils to use their minds in anything higher


than the absorption of knowledge. It was therefore rightly called


liberal, because it was the best that was to be had. But it


failed in its aim of familiarizing the citizen with the great


thoughts of antiquity; it was generally forgotten as soon as


school-time was over; and it raised an injurious antagonism


between business and culture. Now however the advance of


knowledge is enabling us to use science and art to supplement the


curriculum of the grammar-school, and to give to those who can


afford it an education that develops their best faculties, and


starts them on the track of thoughts which will most stimulate


the higher activities of their minds in after-life. The time


spent on learning to spell is almost wasted: if spelling and


pronunciation are brought into harmony in the English language as


in most others, about a year will be added to the effective


school education without any additional cost.





5. As Nasmyth says; if a lad, having dropped two peas at random


on a table, can readily put a third pea midway in a line between


them, he is on the way to become a good mechanic. Command over


eye and hand is gained in the ordinary English games, no less


than in the playful work of the Kinder-garten. Drawing has always


been on the border line between work and play.





6. One of the weakest points of technical education is that it


does not educate the sense of proportion and the desire for


simplicity of detail. The English, and to an even greater extent,


the Americans, have acquired in actual business the faculty of


rejecting intricacies in machinery and processes, which are not


worth what they cost, and practical instinct of this kind often


enables them to succeed in competition with Continental rivals


who are much better educated.





7. A good plan is that of spending the six winter months of


several years after leaving school in learning science in


College, and the six summer months as articled pupils in large


workshops. The present writer introduced this plan about forty


years ago at University College, Bristol (now the University of


Bristol). But it has practical difficulties which can be overcome


only by the cordial and generous co-operation of the heads of


large firms with the College authorities. Another excellent plan


is that adopted in the school attached to the works of Messrs


Mather and Platt at Manchester. "The drawings made in the school


are of work actually in progress in the shops. One day the


teacher gives the necessary explanations and calculations, and


the next day the scholars see, as it were on the anvil, the very


thing which has been the subject of his lecture."





8. The employer binds himself to see that the apprentice is


thoroughly taught in the workshop all the subdivisions of one


great division of his trade, instead of letting him learn only


one of these subdivisions, as too often happens now. The


apprentice's training would then often be as broad as if he had


been taught the whole of the trade as it existed a few


generations ago; and it might be supplemented by a theoretical


knowledge of all branches of the trade, acquired in a technical


school. Something resembling the old apprenticeship system has


recently come into vogue for young Englishmen who desire to learn


the business of farming under the peculiar conditions of a new


country... and there are some signs that the plan may be extended


to the business of farming in this country, for which it is in


many respects admirably adapted. But there remains a great deal


of education suitable to the farmer and to the farm-labourer


which can best be given in agricultural colleges and dairy


schools.


    Meanwhile many great agencies for the technical education of


adults are being rapidly developed, such as public exhibitions,


trade associations and congresses, and trade journals. Each of


them has its own work to do. In agriculture and some other trades


the greatest aid to progress is perhaps found in public shows.


But those industries, which are more advanced and in the hands of


persons of studious habits, owe more to the diffusion of


practical and scientific knowledge by trade journals; which,


aided by changes in the methods of industry and also in its


social conditions, are breaking up trade secrets and helping men


of small means in competition with their richer rivals.





9. The heads of almost every progressive firm on the Continent


have carefully studied processes and machinery in foreign lands.


The English are great travellers; but partly perhaps on account


of their ignorance of other languages they seem hardly to set


enough store on the technical education that can be gained by the


wise use of travel.





10. In fact every designer in a primitive age is governed by


precedent: only very daring people depart from it; even they do


not depart far, and their innovations are subjected to the test


of experience, which, in the long run, is infallible. For though


the crudest and most ridiculous fashions in art and in literature


will be accepted by the people for a time at the bidding of their


social superiors, nothing but true artistic excellence has


enabled a ballad or a melody, a style of dress or a pattern of


furniture to retain its popularity among a whole nation for many


generations together. These innovations, then, which were


inconsistent with the true spirit of art were suppressed, and


those that were on the right track were retained, and became the


starting-point for further progress; and thus traditional


instincts played a great part in preserving the purity of the


industrial arts in Oriental countries, and to a less extent in


medieval Europe.





11. French designers find it best to live in Paris: if they stay


for long out of contact with the central movements of fashion


they seem to fall behindhand. Most of them have been educated as


artists, but have failed of their highest ambition. It is only in


exceptional cases, as for instance for the Sèvres china, that


those who have succeeded as artists find it worth their while to


design. Englishmen can, however, hold their own in designing for


Oriental markets, and there is evidence that the English are at


least equal to the French in originality; though they are


inferior in quickness in seeing how to group forms and colours so


as to obtain an effective result. (See the Report on Technical


Education, Vol. 1, pp. 256, 261, 324, 325 and Vol. III, pp.


151-2, 202-3, 211 and passim.) It is probable that the profession


of the modern designer has not yet risen to the best position


which it is capable of holding. For it has been to a


disproportionate extent under the influence of one nation; and


that nation is one whose works in the highest branches of art


have seldom borne to be transplanted. They have indeed often been


applauded and imitated at the time by other nations, but they


have as yet seldom struck a key-note for the best work of later


generations.





12. The painters themselves have put on record in the


portrait-galleries the fact that in medieval times, and even


later, their art attracted a larger share of the best intellect


than it does now; when the ambition of youth is tempted by the


excitement of modern business, when its zeal for imperishable


achievements finds a field in the discoveries of modern science,


and, lastly, when a great deal of excellent talent is insensibly


diverted from high aims by the ready pay to be got by hastily


writing half-thoughts for periodical literature.





13. Mill was so much impressed by the difficulties that beset a


parent in the attempt to bring up his son to an occupation widely


different in character from his own, that he said (Principles,


II, XIV, 2): --  "So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the


separation, so strongly marked the line of demarcation, between


the different grades of labourers, as to be almost equivalent to


an hereditary distinction of caste; each employment being chiefly


recruited from the children of those already employed in it, or


in employments of the same rank with it in social estimation, or


from the children of persons who, if originally of a lower rank,


have succeeded in raising themselves by their exertions. The


liberal professions are mostly supplied by the sons of either the


professional or the idle classes: the more highly skilled manual


employments are filled up from the sons of skilled artisans or


the class of tradesmen who rank with them: the lower classes of


skilled employments are in a similar case; and unskilled


labourers, with occasional exceptions, remain from father to son


in their pristine condition. Consequently the wages of each class


have hitherto been regulated by the increase of its own


population, rather than that of the general population of the


country." But he goes on, "The changes, however, now so rapidly


taking place in usages and ideas are undermining all these


distinctions."


    His prescience has been vindicated by the progress of change


since he wrote. The broad lines of division which he pointed out


have been almost obliterated by the rapid action of those causes


which, as we saw earlier in the chapter, are reducing the amount


of skill and ability required in some occupations and increasing


it in others. We cannot any longer regard different occupations


as distributed among four great planes; but we may perhaps think


of them as resembling a long flight of steps of unequal breadth,


some of them being so broad as to act as landing stages. Or even


better still we might picture to ourselves two flights of stairs,


one representing the "hard-handed industries" and the other "the


soft handed industries"; because the vertical division between


these two is in fact as broad and as clearly marked as the


horizontal division between any two grades.


    Mill's classification had lost great part of its value when


Cairnes adopted it (Leading Principles, p. 72). A classification


more suited to our existing conditions is offered by Giddings


(Political Science Quarterly, Vol. II, pp. 69-71). It is open to


the objection that it draws broad lines of division where nature


has made no broad lines; but it is perhaps as good as any


division of industry into four grades can be. His divisions are



(i) automatic manual labour, including common labourers and


machine tenders; (ii) responsible manual labour, including those


who can be entrusted with some responsibility and labour of


self-direction; (iii) automatic brain workers, such as book


keepers, and (iv) responsible brain workers, including the


superintendents and directors.


    The conditions and methods of the large and incessant


movement of the population upwards and downwards from grade to


grade are studied more fully below, VI, IV, V and VII.


    The growing demand for boys to run errands, and to do other


work that has no educational value, has increased the danger that


parents may send their sons into avenues that have no outlook for


good employment in later years: and something is being done by


public agency, and more by the devotion and energy of men and


women in unofficial association, in giving out notes of warning


against such "blind alley" occupations, and assisting lads to


prepare themselves for skilled work. These efforts may be of


great national value. But care must be taken that this guidance


and help is as accessible to the higher strains of the working


class population when in need of it as to the lower; lest the


race should degenerate.





Chapter 7





The Growth of Wealth





    1. In this chapter it is not necessary to distinguish the


points of view in which wealth is regarded as the object of


consumption and as an agent of production; we are concerned with


the growth of wealth simply, and we have no need to emphasize its


uses as capital.


    The earliest forms of wealth were probably implements for


hunting and fishing, and personal ornaments; and, in cold


countries, clothing and huts.(1*) During this stage the


domestication of animals began; but at first they were probably


cared for chiefly for their own sake, because they were


beautiful, and it was pleasant to have them; they were, like


articles of personal ornament, desired because of the immediate


gratification to be derived from their possession rather than as


a provision against future needs.(2*) Gradually the herds of


domesticated animals increased; and during the pastoral stage


they were at once the pleasure and the pride of their possessors,


the outward emblems of social rank, and by far the most important


store of wealth accumulated as a provision against future needs.


    As numbers thickened and the people settled down to


agriculture, cultivated land took the first place in the


inventory of wealth; and that part of the value of the land which


was due to improvements (among which wells held a conspicuous


place) became the chief element of capital, in the narrower sense


of the term. Next in importance came houses, domesticated


animals, and in some places boats and ships; but the implements


of production, whether for use in agriculture or in domestic


manufactures, remained for a long time of little value. In some


places, however, precious stones and the precious metals in


various forms became early a leading object of desire and a


recognized means of hoarding wealth; while, to say nothing of the


palaces of monarchs, a large part of social wealth in many


comparatively rude civilizations took the form of edifices for


public purposes, chiefly religious, and of roads and bridges, of


canals and irrigation works.


    For some thousands of years these remained the chief forms of


accumulated wealth. In towns indeed houses and household


furniture took the first place, and stocks of the more expensive


of raw materials counted for a good deal; but though the


inhabitants of the towns had often more wealth per head than


those of the country, their total numbers were small; and their


aggregate wealth was very much less than that of the country.


During all this time the only trade that used very expensive


implements was the trade of carrying goods by water: the weaver's


looms, the husbandman's ploughs and the blacksmith's anvils were


of simple construction and were of little account beside the


merchant's ships. But in the eighteenth century England


inaugurated the era of expensive implements.


    The implements of the English farmer had been rising slowly


in value for a long time; but the progress was quickened in the


eighteenth century. After a while the use first of water power


and then of steam power caused the rapid Substitution of


expensive machinery for inexpensive hand tools in one department


of production after another. As in earlier times the most


expensive implements were ships and in some cases canals for


navigation and irrigation, so now they are the means of


locomotion in general; -- railways. and tramways, canals, docks


and ships, telegraph and telephone systems and water-works: even


gas-works might almost come under this head, on the ground that a


great part of their plant is devoted to distributing the gas.


After these come mines and iron and chemical works, ship-building


yards, printing-presses, and other large factories full of


expensive machinery.


    On whichever side we look we find that the progress and


diffusion of knowledge are constantly leading to the adoption of


new processes and new machinery which economize human effort on


condition that some of the effort is spent a good while before


the attainment of the ultimate ends to which it is directed. It


is not easy to measure this progress exactly, because many modern


industries had no counterpart in ancient times. But let us


compare the past and present conditions of the four great


industries the products of which have not changed their general


character: viz. agriculture, the building, the cloth-making, and


the carrying trades. In the first two of these hand work still


retains an important place: but even in them there is a great


development of expensive machinery. Compare for instance the rude


implements of an Indian Ryot even of to-day with the equipment of


a progressive Lowland farmer;(3*) and consider the brick-making,


mortar-making, sawing, planing, moulding and slotting machines of


a modern builder, his steam cranes and his electric light. And if


we turn to the textile trades, or at least to those of them which


make the simpler products, we find each operative in early times


content with implements the cost of which was equivalent to but a


few months of his labour; while in modern times it is estimated


that for each man, woman and child employed there is a capital in


plant alone of more than ?00, or say the equivalent of five


years' labour. Again the cost of a steam-ship is perhaps


equivalent to the labour for fifteen years or more of those who


work her; while a capital of about ?,000,000,000 invested in


railways in England and Wales is equivalent to the work for more


than twenty years of the 300,000 wage-earners employed on them.





    2. As civilization has progressed, man has always been


developing new wants, and new and more expensive ways of


gratifying them. The rate of progress has sometimes been slow,


and occasionally there has even been a great retrograde movement;


but now we are moving on at a rapid pace that grows quicker every


year; and we cannot guess where it will stop. On every side


further openings are sure to offer themselves, all of which will


tend to change the character of our social and industrial life,


and to enable us to turn to account vast stores of capital in


providing new gratifications and new ways of economizing effort


by expending it in anticipation of distant wants. There seems to


be no good reason for believing that we are anywhere near a


stationary state in which there will be no new important wants to


be satisfied; in which there will be no more room for profitably


investing present effort in providing for the future, and in


which the accumulation of wealth will cease to have any reward.


The whole history of man shows that his wants expand with the


growth of his wealth and knowledge.(4*)


    And with the growth of openings for the investment of capital


there is a constant increase in that surplus of production over


the necessaries of life, which gives the power to save. When the


arts of production were rude, there was very little surplus,


except where a strong ruling race kept the subject masses hard at


work on the bare necessaries of life, and where the climate was


so mild that those necessaries were small and easily obtained.


But every increase in the arts of production, and in the capital


accumulated to assist and support labour in future production,


increased the surplus out of which more wealth could be


accumulated. After a time civilization became possible in


temperate and even in cold climates; the increase of material


wealth was possible under conditions which did not enervate the


worker, and did not therefore destroy the foundations on which it


rested.(5*) Thus from step to step wealth and knowledge have


grown, and with every step the power of saving wealth and


extending knowledge has increased.





    3. The habit of distinctly realizing the future and providing


for it has developed itself slowly and fitfully in the course of


man's history. Travellers tell us of tribes who might double


their resources and enjoyments without increasing their total


labour, if they would only apply a little in advance the means


that lie within their power and their knowledge; as, for


instance, by fencing in their little plots of vegetables against


the intrusion of wild animals.


    But even this apathy is perhaps less strange than the


wastefulness that is found now among some classes in our own


country. Cases are not rare of men who alternate between earning


two or three pounds a week and being reduced to the verge of


starvation: the utility of a shilling to them when they are in


employment is less than that of a penny when they are out of it,


and yet they never attempt to make provision for the time of


need.(6*) At the opposite extreme there are misers, in some of


whom the passion for saving borders on insanity; while, even


among peasant proprietors and some other classes, we meet not


unfrequently with people who carry thrift so far as to stint


themselves of necessaries, and to impair their power of future


work. Thus they lose every way: they never really enjoy life;


while the income. which their stored-up wealth brings them is


less than they would have got from the increase of their earning


power, if they bad invested in themselves the wealth that they


have accumulated in a material form.


    In India, and to a less extent in Ireland, we find people who


do indeed abstain from immediate enjoyment and save up


considerable sums with great self-sacrifice, but spend all their


savings in lavish festivities at funerals and marriages. They


make intermittent provision for the near future, but scarcely any


permanent provision for the distant future: the great engineering


works by which their productive resources have been so much


increased, have been made chiefly with the capital of the much


less self-denying race of Englishmen.


    Thus the causes which control the accumulation of wealth


differ widely in different countries and different ages. They are


not quite the same among any two races, and perhaps not even


among any two social classes in the same race. They depend much


on social and religious sanctions; and it is remarkable how, when


the binding force of custom has been in any degree loosened,


differences of personal character will cause neighbours brought


up under like conditions to differ from one another more widely


and more frequently in their habits of extravagance or thrift


than in almost any other respect.





    4. The thriftlessness of early times was in a great measure


due to the want of security that those who made provision for the


future would enjoy it: only those who were already wealthy were


strong enough to hold what they had saved; the laborious and


self-denying peasant who had heaped up a little store of wealth


only to see it taken from him by a stronger hand, was a constant


warning to his neighbours to enjoy their pleasure and their rest


when they could. The border country between England and Scotland


made little progress so long as it was liable to incessant


forays; there was very little saving by the French peasants in


the eighteenth century when they could escape the plunder of the


tax-gatherer only by appearing to be poor, or by Irish cottiers,


who, on many estates, even forty years ago, were compelled to


follow the same course in order to avoid the landlords' claims of


exorbitant rents.


    Insecurity of this kind has nearly passed away from the


civilized world. But we are still suffering in England from the


effects of the Poor-law which ruled at the beginning of last


century, and which introduced a new form of insecurity for the


working classes. For it arranged that part of their wages should,


in effect, be given in the form of poor relief; and that this


should be distributed among them in inverse proportion to their


industry and thrift and forethought, so that many thought it


foolish to make provision for the future. The traditions and


instincts which were fostered by that evil experience are even


now a great hindrance to the progress of the working classes; and


the principle which nominally at least underlies the present


Poor-law, that the State should take account only of destitution


and not at all of merit, acts in the same direction, though with


less force.


    Insecurity of this kind also is being diminished: the growth


of enlightened views as to the duties of the State and of private


persons towards the poor, is tending to make it every day more


true that those who have helped themselves and endeavoured to


provide for their own future will be cared for by society better


than the idle and the thoughtless. But the progress in this


direction is still slow, and there remains much to be done yet.





    5. The growth of a money-economy and of modern habits of


business does indeed hinder the accumulation of wealth by putting


new temptations in the way of those who are inclined to live


extravagantly. In old times if a man wanted a good house to live


in he must build it himself; now he finds plenty of good houses


to be hired at a rent. Formerly, if he wanted good beer he must


have a good brewhouse, now he can buy it more cheaply and better


than he could brew it. Now he can borrow books from a library


instead of buying them; and he can even furnish his house before


he is ready to pay for his furniture. Thus in many ways the


modern systems of buying and selling, and lending and borrowing,


together with the growth of new wants, lead to new extravagances,


and to a subordination of the interests of the future to those of


the present.


    But on the other hand, a money-economy increases the variety


of the uses between which a person can distribute his future


expenditure. A person who in a primitive state of society stores


up some things against a future need, may find that after all he


does not need those things as much as others which he has not


stored up: and there are many future wants against which it is


impossible to provide directly by storing up goods. But he who


has stored up capital from which he derives a money income can


buy what he will to meet his needs as they arise.(7*)


    Again, modern methods of business have brought with them


opportunities for the safe investment of capital in such ways as


to yield a revenue to persons who have no good opportunity of


engaging in any business, -- not even in that of agriculture,


where the land will under some conditions act as a trustworthy


savings-bank. These new opportunities have induced some people


who would not otherwise have attempted it to put by something for


their own old age. And, what has had a far greater effect on the


growth of wealth, it has rendered it far easier for a man to


provide a secure income for his wife and children after his


death: for, after all, family affection is the main motive of


saving.





    6. There are indeed some who find an intense pleasure in


seeing their hoards of wealth grow up under their hands, with


scarcely any thought for the happiness that may be got from its


use by themselves or by others. They are prompted partly by the


instincts of the chase, by the desire to outstrip their rivals;


by the ambition to have shown ability in getting the wealth, and


to acquire power and social position by its possession. And


sometimes the force of habit, started when they were really in


need of money, has given them, by a sort of reflex action, an


artificial and unreasoning pleasure in amassing wealth for its


own sake. But were it not for the family affections, many who now


work hard and save carefully would not exert themselves to do


more than secure a comfortable annuity for their own lives;


either by purchase from an insurance company, or by arranging to


spend every year, after they had retired from work, part of their


capital as well as all their income. In the one case they would


leave nothing behind them: in the other only provision for that


part of their hoped-for old age, from which they had been cut off


by death. That men labour and save chiefly for the sake of their


families and not for themselves, is shown by the fact that they


seldom spend, after they have retired from work, more than the


income that comes in from their savings, preferring to leave


their stored-up wealth intact for their families; while in this


country alone twenty millions a year are saved in the form of


insurance policies and are available only after the death of


those who save them.


    A man can have no stronger stimulus to energy and enterprise


than the hope of rising in life, and leaving his family to start


from a higher round of the social ladder than that on which he


began. It may even give him an over-mastering passion which


reduces to insignificance the desire for ease, and for all


ordinary pleasures, and sometimes even destroys in him the finer


sensibilities and nobler aspirations. But, as is shown by the


marvellous growth of wealth in America during the present


generation, it makes him a mighty producer and accumulator of


riches; unless indeed he is in too great a hurry to grasp the


social position which his wealth will give him: for his ambition


may then lead him into as great extravagance as could have been


induced by an improvident and self-indulgent temperament.


    The greatest savings are made by those who have been brought


up on narrow means to stern hard work, who have retained their


simple habits, in spite of success in business, and who nourish a


contempt for showy expenditure and a desire to be found at their


death richer than they had been thought to be. This type of


character is frequent in the quieter parts of old but vigorous


countries, and it was very common among the middle classes in the


rural districts of England for more than a generation after the


pressure of the great French war and the heavy taxes that


lingered in its wake.





    7. Next, as to the sources of accumulation. The power to save


depends on an excess of income over necessary expenditure; and


this is greatest among the wealthy, In this country most of the


larger incomes, but only a few of the smaller, are chiefly


derived from capital. And, early in the present century, the


commercial classes in England had much more saving habits than


either the country gentlemen or the working classes. These causes


combined to make English economists of the last generation regard


savings as made almost exclusively from the profits of capital.


    But even in modern England rent and the earnings of


professional men and hired workers are an important source of


accumulation: and they have been the chief source of it in all


the earlier stages of civilization.(8*) Moreover, the middle and


especially the professional classes have always denied themselves


much in order to invest capital in the education of their


children; while a great part of the wages of the working classes


is invested in the physical health and strength of their


children. The older economists took too little account of the


fact that the human faculties are as important a means of


production as any other kind of capital; and we may conclude, in


opposition to them, that any change in the distribution of wealth


which gives more to the wage receivers and less to the


capitalists is likely, other things being equal, to hasten the


increase of material production, and that it will not perceptibly


retard the storing-up of material wealth. Of course other things


would not be equal if the change were brought about by violent


methods which gave a shock to public security. But a slight and


temporary check to the accumulation of material wealth need not


necessarily be an evil, even from a purely economic point of


view, if, being made quietly and without disturbance, it provided


better opportunities for the great mass of the people, increased


their efficiency, and developed in them such habits of


self-respect as to result in the growth of a much more efficient


race of producers in the next generation. For then it might do


more in the long-run to promote the growth of even material


wealth than great additions to our stock of factories and


steam-engines.


    A people among whom wealth is well distributed, and who have


high ambitions, are likely to accumulate a great deal of public


property; and the savings made in this form alone by some


well-to-do democracies form no inconsiderable part of the best


possessions which our own age has inherited from its


predecessors. The growth of the co-operative movement in all its


many forms, of building societies, friendly societies,


trades-unions, of working men's savings-banks etc., shows that,


even so far as the immediate accumulation of material wealth


goes, the resources of the country are not, as the older


economists assumed, entirely lost when they are spent in paying


wages.(9*)





    8. Having looked at the development of the methods of saving


and the accumulation of wealth, we may now return to that


analysis of the relations between present and deferred


gratifications, which we began from another point of view in our


study of Demand.(10*)


    We there saw that anyone, who has a stock of a commodity


which is applicable to several uses, endeavours to distribute it


between them all in such a way as to give him the greatest


satisfaction. If he thinks he could obtain more satisfaction by


transferring some of it from one use to another he will do so.


If, therefore, he makes his distribution rightly, he stops in


applying it to each several use at such a point that he gets an


equal amount of good out of the application that he is only just


induced to make of it to each separate use; (in other words, he


distributes it between the different uses in such a way that it


has the same marginal utility in each).


    We saw, further, that the principle remains the same whether


all the uses are present, or some are present and others


deferred: but that in this latter case some new considerations


enter, of which the chief are, firstly, that the deferring of a


gratification necessarily introduces some uncertainty as to its


ever being enjoyed; and secondly, that, as human nature is


constituted, a present gratification is generally, though not


always, preferred to a gratification that is expected to be equal


to it, and is as certain as anything can be in human life.


    A prudent person who thought that he would derive equal


gratifications from equal means at all stages of his life, would


perhaps endeavour to distribute his means equally over his whole


life: and if he thought that there was a danger that his power of


earning income at a future date would run short, he would


certainly save some of his means for a future date. He would do


this not only if he thought that his savings would increase in


his hands, but even if he thought they would diminish. He would


put by a few fruit and eggs for the winter, because they would


then be scarce, though they would not improve by keeping. If he


did not see his way to investing his earnings in trade or on


loan, so as to derive interest or profits from them, he would


follow the example of some of our own forefathers who accumulated


small stores of guineas which they carried into the country, when


they retired from active life. They reckoned that the extra


gratification which they could get by spending a few more guineas


while money was coming in fast, would be of less service to them


than the comfort which those guineas would buy for them in their


old age. The care of the guineas cost them a great deal of


trouble; and no doubt they would have been willing to pay some


small charge to any one who would have relieved them from the


trouble without occasioning them any sort of risk.


    We can therefore imagine a state of things in which stored-up


wealth could be put to but little good use; in which many persons


wanted to make provision for their own future; while but few of


those who wanted to borrow goods, were able to offer good


security for returning them, or equivalent goods, at a future


date. In such a state of things the postponement of, and waiting


for enjoyments would be an action that incurred a penalty rather


than reaped a reward: by handing over his means to another to be


taken care of, a person could only expect to get a sure promise


of something less, and not of something more than that which he


lent: the rate of interest would be negative.(11*)


    Such a state of things is conceivable. But it is also


conceivable, and almost equally probable, that people may be so


anxious to work that they will undergo some penalty as a


condition of obtaining leave to work. For, as deferring the


consumption of some of his means is a thing which a prudent


person would desire on its own account, so doing some work is a


desirable object on its own account to a healthy person.


Political prisoners, for instance, generally regard it as a


favour to be allowed to do a little work. And human nature being


what it is, we are justified in speaking of the interest on


capital as the reward of the sacrifice involved in the waiting


for the enjoyment of material resources, because few people would


save much without reward; just as we speak of wages as the reward


of labour, because few people would work hard without reward.


    The sacrifice of present pleasure for the sake of future, has


been called abstinence by economists. But this term has been


misunderstood: for the greatest accumulators of wealth are very


rich persons, some of whom live in luxury, and certainly do not


practise abstinence in that sense of the term in which it is


convertible with abstemiousness. What economists meant was that,


when a person abstained from consuming anything which he had the


power of consuming, with the purpose of increasing his resources


in the future, his abstinence from that particular act of


consumption increased the accumulation of wealth. Since, however,


the term is liable to be misunderstood, we may with advantage


avoid its use, and say that the accumulation of wealth is


generally the result of a postponement of enjoyment, or of a


waiting for it.(12*) Or, in other words again, it is dependent on


man's prospectiveness; that is, his faculty of realizing the


future.


    The "demand price" of accumulation, that is, the future


pleasure which his surroundings enable a person to obtain by


working and waiting for the future, takes many forms: but the


substance is always the same. The extra pleasure which a peasant


who has built a weatherproof hut derives from its usance, while


the snow is drifting into those of his neighbours who have spent


less labour on building theirs, is the price earned by his


working and waiting. It represents the extra productiveness of


efforts wisely spent in providing against distant evils, or for


the satisfaction of future wants, as compared with that which


would have been derived from an impulsive grasping at immediate


satisfactions. Thus it is similar in all fundamental respects to


the interest which the retired physician derives from the capital


he has lent to a factory or a mine to enable it to improve its


machinery; and on account of the numerical definiteness of the


form in which it is expressed, we may take that interest to be


the type of and to represent the usance of wealth in other forms.


    It matters not for our immediate purpose whether the power


over the enjoyment for which the person waits, was earned by him


directly by labour, which is the original source of nearly all


enjoyment; or was acquired by him from others, by exchange or by


inheritance, by legitimate trade or by unscrupulous forms of


speculation, by spoliation or by fraud: the only points with


which we are just now concerned are that the growth of wealth


involves in general a deliberate waiting for a pleasure which a


person has (rightly or wrongly) the power of commanding in the


immediate present, and that his willingness so to wait depends on


his habit of vividly realizing the future and providing for it.





    9. But let us look more closely at the statement that, as


human nature is constituted, an increase in the future pleasure


which can be secured by a present given sacrifice will in general


increase the amount of present sacrifice that people will make.


Suppose, for instance, that villagers have to get timber for


building their cottages from the forests; the more distant these


are, the smaller will be the return of future comfort got by each


day's work in fetching the wood, the less will be their future


gain from the wealth accumulated probably by each day's work: and


this smallness of the return of future pleasure, to be got at a


given present sacrifice, will tend to prevent them from


increasing the size of their cottages; and will perhaps diminish


on the whole the amount of labour they spend in getting timber.


But this rule is not without exception. For, if custom has made


them familiar with cottages of only one fashion, the further they


are from the woods, and the smaller the usance to be got from the


produce of one day's work, the more days' work will they give.


    And similarly if a person expects, not to use his wealth


himself, but to let it out on interest, the higher the rate of


interest the higher his reward for saving. If the rate of


interest on sound investments is 4 per cent., and he gives up


?00 worth of enjoyment now, he may expect an annuity of ? worth


of enjoyment: but he can expect only ? worth, if the rate is 3


per cent. And a fall in the rate of interest will generally lower


the margin at which a person finds it just not worth while to


give up present pleasures for the sake of those future pleasures


that are to be secured by saving some of his means. It will


therefore generally cause people to consume a little more now,


and to make less provision for future enjoyment. But this rule is


not without exception.


    Sir Josiah Child remarked more than two centuries ago, that


in countries in which the rate of interest is high, merchants


"when they have gotten great wealth, leave trading" and lend out


their money at interest, "the gain thereof being so easy, certain


and great; whereas in other countries where interest is at a


lower rate, they continue merchants from generation to


generation, and enrich themselves and the state." And it is as


true now, as it was then, that many men retire from business when


they are yet almost in the prime of life, and when their


knowledge of men and things might enable them to conduct their


business more efficiently than ever. Again, as Sargant has


pointed out, if a man has decided to go on working and saving


till he has provided a certain income for his old age, or for his


family after his death, he will find that he has to save more if


the rate of interest is low than if it is high. Suppose, for


instance, that he wishes to provide an income of ?00 a year on


which he may retire from business, or to insure ?00 a year for


his wife and children after his death: if then then the current


rate of interest is 5 per cent., he need only put by ?,000, or


insure his life for ?,000; but if it is 4 per cent., he must


save ?0,000, or insure his life for ?0,000.


    It is then possible that a continued fall in the rate of


interest may be accompanied by a continued increase in the yearly


additions to the world's capital. But none the less is it true


that a fall in the distant benefits to be got by a given amount


of working and waiting for the future does tend on the whole to


diminish the provision which people make for the future; or in


more modern phrase, that a fall in the rate of interest tends to


check the accumulation of wealth. For though with man's growing


command over the resources of nature, he may continue to save


much even with a low rate of interest; yet while human nature


remains as it is every fall in that rate is likely to cause many


more people to save less than to save more than they would


otherwise have done.(13*)





    10. The causes which govern the accumulation of wealth and


its relation to the rate of interest have so many points of


contact with various parts. of economic science, that the study


of them cannot easily be brought together in one part of our


inquiry. And although in the present Book we are concerned mainly


with the side of supply; it has seemed necessary to indicate


provisionally here something of the general relations between the


demand for and the supply of capital. And we have seen that: --


    The accumulation of wealth is governed by a great variety of


causes: by custom, by habits of self-control and realizing the


future, and above all by the power of family affection. Security


is a necessary condition for it, and the progress of knowledge


and intelligence furthers it in many ways.


    A rise in the rate of interest offered for capital, i.e. in


the demand price for saving, tends to increase the volume of


saving. For in spite of the fact that a few people who have


determined to secure an income of a certain fixed amount for


themselves or their family will save less with a high rate of


interest than with a low rate, it is a nearly universal rule that


a rise in the rate increases the desire to save; and it often


increases the power to save, or rather it is often an indication


of an increased efficiency of our productive resources: but the


older economists went too far in suggesting that a rise of


interest (or of profits) at the expense of wages always increased


the power of saving: they forgot that from the national point of


view the investment of wealth in the child of the working man is


as productive as its investment in horses or machinery.


    It must however be recollected that the annual investment of


wealth is a small part of the already existing stock, and that


therefore the stock would not be increased perceptibly in any one


year by even a considerable increase in the annual rate of


saving.





 NOTE ON THE STATISTICS OF THE GROWTH OF WEALTH





    11. The statistical history of the growth of wealth is


singularly poor and misleading. This is partly due to


difficulties inherent in any attempt to give a numerical measure


of wealth which shall be applicable to different places and


times, partly to the absence of systematic attempts to collect


the necessary facts. The Government of the United States does


indeed ask for returns of every person's property; and though the


results thus obtained are not satisfactory, yet they are perhaps


the best we have.


    Estimates of the wealth of other countries have to be based


almost exclusively on estimates of income, which are capitalized


at various numbers of years' purchase; this number being chosen


with reference (i) to the general rate of interest current at the


time, (ii) to the extent to which the income derived from the use


of wealth in any particular form is to be credited (a) to the


permanent income-yielding power of the wealth itself; and (b) to


either the labour spent in applying it, or the using up of the


capital itself. This last head is specially important in the case


of ironworks which depreciate rapidly, and still more in the case


of such mines as are likely to be speedily exhausted; both must


be capitalized at only a few years' purchase. On the other hand,


the income-yielding power of land is likely to increase; and


where that is the case, the income from land has to be


capitalized at a great number of years' purchase (which may be


regarded as making a negative provision under the head of ii, b).


    Land, houses, and live stock are the three forms of wealth


which have been in the first rank of importance always and


everywhere. But land differs from other things in this, that an


increase in its value is often chiefly due to an increase in its


scarcity; and is therefore a measure rather of growing wants,


than of growing means of meeting wants. Thus the land of the


United States in 1880 counted as of about equal value with the


land of the United Kingdom, and about half that of France. Its


money value was insignificant a hundred years ago; and if the


density of population two or three hundred years hence is nearly


the same in the United States as in the United Kingdom, the land


of the former will then be worth at least twenty times as much as


that of the latter.


    In the early middle ages the whole value of the land of


England was much less than that of the few large-boned but


small-sized animals that starved through the winter on it: now,


though much of the best land is entered under the heads of


houses, railways, etc.; though the live stock is now probably


more than ten times as heavy in aggregate weight, and of better


quality; and though there is now abundant farming capital of


kinds which were then unknown; yet agricultural land is now worth


more than three times as much as the farm stock. The few years of


the pressure of the great French war nearly doubled the nominal


value of the land of England. Since then free trade, improvements


in transport, the opening of new countries, and other causes have


lowered the nominal value of that part of the land which is


devoted to agriculture. And they have made the general purchasing


power of money in terms of commodities rise in England relatively


to the Continent. Early in the last century 25 fr. would buy


more, and especially more of the things needed by the working


classes, in France and Germany than ? would in England. But now


the advantage is the other way: and this causes the recent growth


of the wealth of France and Germany to appear to be greater


relatively to that of England than it really is.


    When account is taken of facts of this class, and also of the


fact that a fall in the rate of interest increases the number of


years' purchase at which any income has to be capitalized, and


therefore increases the value of a property which yields a given


income; we see that the estimates of national wealth would be


very misleading, even if the statistics of income on which they


were based were accurate. But still such estimates are not wholly


without value.


    Sir R. Giffen's Growth of Capital and Mr Chiozza Money's


Riches and Poverty contain suggestive discussions on many of the


figures in the following table.





Country and                 Land       Houses   Farm-Capital


 Author of                £million    £million    £million


 Estimate





England


 1679 (Petty)                144         30          36


 1690 (Gregory King)         180         45          25


 1812 (Colquhoun)            750        300         143


 1885 (Giffen)             1,333      1,700         382





United Kingdom


 1812 (Colquhoun)          1,200        400         228


 1855 (Edleston)           1,700        550         472


 1865 (Giffen)             1,864      1,031         620


 1875   --                 2,007      1,420         668


 1885   --                 1,691      2,827         522


 1905 (Money)                966      2,827         285





United States


 1880 (Census)             2,040      2,000         480


 1890   --


 1900   --





France


 1892 (de Foville)         3,000      2,000         400





Italy


 1884 (Pantaleoni)         1,160        360





                        Other         Total         Wealth


                        Wealth        Wealth        per cap.


                        £million      £million        ?





England


 1679 (Petty)              40             250            42


 1690 (Gregory King)       70             320            58


 1812 (Colquhoun)         653           1,846           180


 1885 (Giffen)          3,012           6,427           315





United Kingdom


 1812 (Colquhoun)         908           2,736           160


 1855 (Edleston)        1,048           3,760           130


 1865 (Giffen)          2,598           6,113           200


 1875   --              4,453           8,548           260


 1885   --              5,897          10,037           270


 1905 (Money)           7,326          11,414           265





United States


 1880 (Census)          4,208           8,728           175


 1890   --                             13,200           208


 1900   --                             18,860           247





France


 1892 (de Foville)      4,000           9,400           247





Italy


 1884 (Pantaleoni)                      1,920            65








But their divergences show the great uncertainty of all such


estimates. Mr Money's estimate of the value of land, i.e.


agricultural land with farm buildings, is probably too low. Sir


R. Giffen estimates the value of public property at £m. 500: and


he omits public loans held at home, on the ground that the


entries for them would cancel one another, as much being debited


under the head of public property as is credited under that of


private property. But Mr Money reckons the gross value of public


roads, parks, buildings, bridges, sewers, lighting and water


works, tramways etc. at £m. 1,650: and, after deducting from this


£m. 1,200 for public loans he gets £m. 450 for the net value of


public property; and he thus becomes free to count public loans


held at home under private property. He estimates the value of


foreign stock exchange securities and other foreign property held


in the United Kingdom at £m. 1,821. These estimates of wealth are


mainly based on estimates of income: and, as regards the


statistics of income, attention may be directed to Mr Bowley's


instructive analysis in National progress since 1882; and in The


Economic Journal for September 1904.


    Sir R. Giffen estimates the wealth of the British Empire in


1903 (Statistical Journal, Vol. 66, p. 584) thus:





     United Kingdom...... £m. 15,000


     Canada.........       "   1,350


     Australasia.........  "   1,100


     India.........        "   3,000


     South Africa......    "     600


     Remainder of Empire..."   1,200





    A tentative history of changes in the relative wealth of


different parts of England has been deduced by Rogers from the


assessment of the several counties for the purpose of taxation.


Le Vicomte d' Avenel's great work L'Histoire Économique de la


Propriét?&c. 1200-1800 contains a rich store of materials as to


France; and comparative studies of the growth of wealth in France


and other nations have been made by Levasseur, Leroy Beaulieu,


Neymarck and de Foville.


    Mr Crammond, addressing the institute of Bankers in March


1919, estimated the national wealth of the United Kingdom to be


£m. 24,000, and the national income to be £m. 3,600. He reckoned


the net value of the country's foreign investments to have fallen


to £m. 1,600, she having recently sold securities amounting to


£m. 1,600; and borrowed another £m. 1,400. On the balance she


appeared to be a creditor to the amount of £m. 2,600: but a great


part of this amount cannot be reckoned as adequately secured.





NOTES:





1. A short but suggestive study of the growth of wealth in its


early forms, and of the arts of life, is given in Tylor's


Anthropology.





2. Bagehot (Economic Studies, pp. 163-5), after quoting the


evidence which Galton has collected on the keeping of pet animals


by savage tribes, points out that we find here a good


illustration of the fact that however careless a savage race may


be for the future, it cannot avoid making some provision for it.


A bow, a fishing-net, which will do its work well in getting food


for to-day, must be of service for many days to come: a horse or


a canoe that will carry one well to-day, must be a stored-up


source of many future enjoyments. The least provident of barbaric


despots may raise a massive pile of buildings, because it is the


most palpable proof of his present wealth and power.





3. The farm implements for a first class Ryot family, including


six or seven adult males, are a few light ploughs and hoes


chiefly of wood, of the total value of about 13 rupees (Sir G.


Phear, Aryan Village, p. 233) or the equivalent of their work for


about a month; while the value of the machinery alone on a well


equipped large modern arable farm amounts to ? an acre


(Equipment of the Farm, edited by J. C. Morton) or say a year's


work for each person employed. They include steam engines,


trench, subsoil and ordinary ploughs, some to be worked by steam


and some by horse power; various grubbers, harrows, rollers,


clod-crushers, seed and manure drills, horse hoes, rakes,


hay-making, mowing and reaping machines, steam or horse


threshing, chaff cutting, turnip cutting, hay-pressing machines


and a multitude of others. Meanwhile there is an increasing use


of silos and covered yards, and constant improvements in the


fittings of the dairy and other farm buildings, all of which give


great economy of effort in the long run, but require a larger


share of it to be spent in preparing the way for the direct work


of the farmer in raising agricultural produce.





4. For instance, improvements which have recently been made in


some American cities indicate that by a sufficient outlay of


capital each house could be supplied with what it does require,


and relieved of what it does not, much more effectively than now,


so as to enable a large part of the population to live in towns


and yet be free from many of the present evils of town life. The


first step is to make under all the streets large tunnels, in


which many pipes and wires can be laid side by side, and repaired


when they get out of order, without any interruption of the


general traffic and without great expense. Motive power, and


possibly even heat, might then be generated at great distances


from the towns (in some cases in coal-mines), and laid on


wherever wanted. Soft water and spring water, and perhaps even


sea water and ozonized air, might be laid on in separate pipes to


nearly every house; while steam-pipes might be used for giving


warmth in winter, and compressed air for lowering the heat of


summer; or the heat might be supplied by gas of great heating


power laid on in special pipes, while light was derived from gas


specially suited for the purpose or from electricity; and every


house might be in electric communication with the rest of the


town. All unwholesome vapours, including those given off by any


domestic fires which were still used, might be carried away by


strong draughts through long conduits, to be purified by passing


through large furnaces and thence away through huge chimneys into


the higher air. To carry out such a scheme in the towns of


England would require the outlay of a much larger capital than


has been absorbed by our railways. This conjecture as to the


ultimate course of town improvement may be wide of the truth; but


it serves to indicate one of very many ways in which the


experience of the past foreshadows broad openings for investing


present effort in providing the means of satisfying our wants in


the future.





5. Comp. Appendix A.





6. They "discount" future benefits (comp. Book III, ch. v,


section 3) at the rate of many thousands per cent per annum.





7. Comp. III, v, section 2.





8. Comp. Principles of Political Economy, by Richard Jones.





9. It must however be admitted that what passes by the name of


public property is often only private wealth borrowed on a


mortgage of future public revenue. Municipal gas-works for


instance are not generally the results of public accumulations.


They were built with wealth saved by private persons, and


borrowed on public account.





10. Above, III, v.





11. The suggestion that the rate of interest may conceivably


become a negative quantity was discussed by Foxwell in a paper on


Some Social Aspects of Banking, read before the Bankers'


Institute in January, 1886.





12. Karl Marx and his followers have found much amusement in


contemplating the accumulations of wealth which result from the


abstinence of Baron Rothschild, which they contrast with the


extravagance of a labourer who feeds a family of seven on seven


shillings a week; and who, living up to his full income,


practises no economic abstinence at all. The argument that it is


Waiting rather than Abstinence, which is rewarded by Interest and


is a factor of production, was given by Macvane in the Harvard


Journal of Economics for July, 1887.





13. See also VI, vi. It may however be observed here that the


dependence of the growth of capital on the high estimation of


"future goods" appears to have been over-estimated by earlier


writers; not under-estimated, as is argued by Prof. Böhm-Bawerk.





Chapter VIII





Industrial Organization





    1. Writers on social science from the time of Plato downwards


have delighted to dwell on the increased efficiency which labour


derives from organization. But in this, as in other cases, Adam


Smith gave a new and larger significance to an old doctrine by


the philosophic thoroughness with which he explained it, and the


practical knowledge with which he illustrated it. After insisting


on the advantages of the division of labour, and pointing out how


they render it possible for increased numbers to live in comfort


on a limited territory, he argued that the pressure of population


on the means of subsistence tends to weed out those races who


through want of organization or for any other cause are unable to


turn to the best account the advantages of the place in which


they live.


    Before Adam Smith's book had yet found many readers,


biologists were already beginning to make great advances towards


understanding the real nature of the differences in organization


which separate the higher from the lower animals; and before two


more generations had elapsed, Malthus' historical account of


man's struggle for existence started Darwin on that inquiry as to


the effects of the struggle for existence in the animal and



vegetable world, which issued in his discovery of the selective


influence constantly played by it. Since that time biology has


more than repaid her debt; and economists have in their turn owed


much to the many profound analogies which have been discovered


between social and especially industrial organization on the one


side and the physical organization of the higher animals on the


other. In a few cases indeed the apparent analogies disappeared


on closer inquiry: but many of those which seemed at first sight


most fanciful, have gradually been supplemented by others, and


have at last established their claim to illustrate a fundamental


unity of action between the laws of nature in the physical and in


the moral world. This central unity is set forth in the general


rule, to which there are not very many exceptions, that the


development of the organism, whether social or physical, involves


an increasing subdivision of functions between its separate parts


on the one hand, and on the other a more intimate connection


between them.(1*) Each part gets to be less and less


self-sufficient, to depend for its wellbeing more and more on


other parts, so that any disorder in any part of a


highly-developed organism will affect other parts also.


    This increased subdivision of functions, or


"differentiation," as it is called, manifests itself with regard


to industry is such forms as the division of labour, and the


development of specialized skill, knowledge and machinery: while


"integration," that is, a growing intimacy and firmness of the


connections between the separate parts of the industrial


organism, shows itself in such forms as the increase of security


of commercial credit, and of the means and habits of


communication by sea and road, by railway and telegraph, by post


and printing-press.


    The doctrine that those organisms which are the most highly


developed, in the sense in which we have just used the phrase,


are those which are most likely to survive in the struggle for


existence, is itself in process of development. It is not yet


completely thought out either in its biological or its economic


relations. But we may pass to consider the main bearings in


economics of the law that the struggle for existence causes those


organisms to multiply which are best fitted to derive benefit


from their environment.


    The law requires to be interpreted carefully: for the fact


that a thing is beneficial to its environment will not by itself


secure its survival either in the physical or in the moral world.


The law of "survival of the fittest" states that those organisms


tend to survive which are best fitted to utilize the environment


for their own purposes. Those that utilize the environment most,


often turn out to be those that benefit those around them most;


but sometimes they are injurious.


    Conversely, the struggle for survival may fail to bring into


existence organisms that would be highly beneficial: and in the


economic world the demand for any industrial arrangement is not


certain to call forth a supply, unless it is something more than


a mere desire for the arrangement, or a need for it. It must be


an efficient demand; that is, it must take effect by offering


adequate payment or some other benefit to those who supply


it.(2*) A mere desire on the part of employees for a share in the


management and the profits of the factory in which they work, or


the need on the part of clever youths for a good technical


education, is not a demand in the sense in which the term is used


when it is said that supply naturally and surely follows demand.


This seems a hard truth: but some of its harshest features are


softened down by the fact that those races, whose members render


services to one another without exacting direct recompense are


not only the most likely to flourish for the time, but most


likely to rear a large number of descendants who inherit their


beneficial habits.





    2. Even in the vegetable world a species of plants, however


vigorous in its growth, which should be neglectful of the


interests of its seeds, would soon perish from the earth. The


standard of family and race duty is often high in the animal


kingdom; and even those predatory animals which we are accustomed


to regard as the types of cruelty, which fiercely utilize the


environment and do nothing for it in return, must yet be willing


as individuals to exert themselves for the benefit of their


offspring. And going beyond the narrower interests of the family


to those of the race, we find that among so-called social


animals, such as bees and ants, those races survive in which the


individual is most energetic in performing varied services for


the society without the prompting of direct gain to himself.


    But when we come to human beings, endowed with reason and


speech, the influence of a tribal sense of duty in strengthening


the tribe takes a more varied form. It is true that in the ruder


stages of human life many of the services rendered by the


individual to others are nearly as much due to hereditary habit


and unreasoning impulse, as are those of the bees and ants. But


deliberate, and therefore moral, self-sacrifice soon makes its


appearance; it is fostered by the far-seeing guidance of prophets


and priests and legislators, and is inculcated by parable and


legend. Gradually the unreasoning sympathy, of which there are


germs in the lower animals, extends its area and gets to be


deliberately adopted as a basis of action: tribal affection,


starting from a level hardly higher than that which prevails in a


pack of wolves or a horde of banditti, gradually grows into a


notable patriotism; and religious ideals are raised and purified.


The races in which these qualities are the most highly developed


are sure, other things being equal, to be stronger than others in


war and in contests with famine and disease; and ultimately to


prevail. Thus the struggle for existence causes in the long run


those races of men to survive in which the individual is most


willing to sacrifice himself for the benefit of those around him;


and which are consequently the best adapted collectively to make


use of their environment.


    Unfortunately however not all the qualities which enable one


race to prevail over another benefit mankind as a whole. It would


no doubt be wrong to lay very much stress on the fact that


warlike habits have often enabled half-savage races to reduce to


submission others who were their superiors in every peaceful


virtue; for such conquests have gradually increased the physical


vigour of the world, and its capacity for great things, and


ultimately perhaps have done more good than harm. But there is no


such qualification to the statement that a race does not


establish its claim to deserve well of the world by the mere fact


that it flourishes in the midst or on the surface of another


race. For, though biology and social science alike show that


parasites sometimes benefit in unexpected ways the race on which


they thrive; yet in many cases they turn the peculiarities of


that race to good account for their own purposes without giving


any good return. The fact that there is an economic demand for


the services of Jewish and Armenian money-dealers in Eastern


Europe and Asia, or for Chinese labour in California, is not by


itself a proof, nor even a very strong ground for believing, that


such arrangements tend to raise the quality of human life as a


whole. For, though a race entirely dependent on its own resources


can scarcely prosper unless it is fairly endowed with the most


important social virtues; yet a race, which has not these virtues


and which is not capable of independent greatness, may be able to


thrive on its relations with another race. But on the whole, and


subject to grave exceptions, those races survive and predominate


in which the best qualities are most strongly developed.





    3. This influence of heredity shows itself nowhere more


markedly than in social organization. For that must necessarily


be a slow growth, the product of many generations: it must be


based on those customs and aptitudes of the great mass of the


people which are incapable of quick change. In early times when


religious, ceremonial, political, military and industrial


organization were intimately connected, and were indeed but


different sides of the same thing, nearly all those nations which


were leading the van of the world's progress were found to agree


in having adopted a more or less strict system of caste: and this


fact by itself proved that the distinction of castes was well


suited to its environment, and that on the whole it strengthened


the races or nations which adopted it. For since it was a


controlling factor of life, the nations which adopted it could


not have generally prevailed over others, if the influence


exerted by it had not been in the main beneficial. Their


pre-eminence proved not that it was free from defects, but that


its excellences, relatively to that particular stage of progress,


outweighed its defects.


    Again we know that an animal or a vegetable species may


differ from its competitors by having two qualities, one of which


is of great advantage to it; while the other is unimportant,


perhaps even slightly injurious, and that the former of these


qualities will make the species succeed in spite of its having


the latter: the survival of which will then be no proof that it


is beneficial. Similarly the struggle for existence has kept


alive many qualities and habits in the human race which were in


themselves of no advantage, but which are associated by a more or


less permanent bond with others that are great sources of


strength. Such instances are found in the tendency to an


overbearing demeanour and a scorn for patient industry among


nations that owe their advance chiefly to military victories; and


again in the tendency among commercial nations to think too much


of wealth and to use it for the purposes of display. But the most


striking instances are found in matters of organization; the


excellent adaptation of the system of caste for the special work


which it had to do, enabled it to flourish in spite of its great


faults, the chief of which were its rigidity, and its sacrifice


of the individual to the interests of society, or rather to


certain special exigencies of society.


    Passing over intermediate stages and coming at once to the


modern organization of the Western world, we find it offering a


striking contrast, and a no less striking resemblance, to the


system of caste. On the one hand, rigidity has been succeeded by


plasticity: the methods of industry which were then stereotyped,


now change with bewildering quickness; the social relations of


classes, and the position of the individual in his class, which


were then definitely fixed by traditional rules, are now


perfectly variable and change their forms with the changing


circumstances of the day. But on the other hand, the sacrifice of


the individual to the exigencies of society as regards the


production of material wealth seems in some respects to be a case


of atavism, a reversion to conditions which prevailed in the


far-away times of the rule of caste. For the division of labour


between the different ranks of industry and between different


individuals in the same rank is so thorough and uncompromising,


that the real interests of the producer are sometimes in danger


of being sacrificed for the sake of increasing the addition which


his work makes to the aggregate production of material wealth.





    4. Adam Smith, while insisting on the general advantages of


that minute division of labour and of that subtle industrial


organization which were being developed with unexampled rapidity


in his time, was yet careful to indicate many points in which the


system failed, and many incidental evils which it involved.(3*)


But many of his followers with less philosophic insight, and in


some cases with less real knowledge of the world, argued boldly


that whatever is, is right. They argued for instance that, if a


man had a talent for managing business, he would be surely led to


use that talent for the benefit of mankind: that meanwhile a like


pursuit of their own interests would lead others to provide for


his use such capital as he could turn to best account; and that


his own interest would lead him so to arrange those in his


employment that everyone should do the highest work of which he


was capable, and no other; and that it would lead him to purchase


and use all machinery and other aids to production, which could


in his hands contribute more than the equivalent of their own


cost towards supplying the wants of the world.


    This doctrine of natural organization contains more truth of


the highest importance to humanity than almost any other which is


equally likely to evade the comprehension of those who discuss


grave social problems without adequate study: and it had a


singular fascination for earnest and thoughtful minds. But its


exaggeration worked much harm, especially to those who delighted


most in it. For it prevented them from seeing and removing the


evil that was intertwined with the good in the changes that were


going on around them. It hindered them from inquiring whether


many even of the broader features of modern industry might not be


transitional, having indeed good work to do in their time, as the


caste system had in its time; but being, like it, serviceable


chiefly in leading the way towards better arrangements for a


happier age. And it did harm by preparing the way for exaggerated


reaction against it.





    5. Moreover the doctrine took no account of the manner in


which organs are strengthened by being used. Herbert Spencer has


insisted with much force on the rule that, if any physical or


mental exercise gives pleasure and is therefore frequent, those


physical or mental organs which are used in it are likely to grow


rapidly. Among the lower animals indeed the action of this rule


is so intimately interwoven with that of the survival of the


fittest, that the distinction between the two need not often be


emphasized. For as it might be guessed a priori, and as seems to


be proved by observation, the struggle for survival tends to


prevent animals from taking much pleasure in the exercise of


functions which do not contribute to their well-being.


    But man, with his strong individuality, has greater freedom.


He delights in the use of his faculties for their own sake;


sometimes using them nobly, whether with the abandon of the great


Greek burst of life, or under the control of a deliberate and


steadfast striving towards important ends; sometimes ignobly, as


in the case of a morbid development of the taste for drink. The


religious, the moral, the intellectual and the artistic faculties


on which the progress of industry depends, are not acquired


solely for the sake of the things that may be got by them; but


are developed by exercise for the sake of the pleasure and the


happiness which they themselves bring: and, in the same way, that


greater factor of economic prosperity, the organization of a


well-ordered state, is the product of an infinite variety of


motives; many of which have no direct connection with the pursuit


of national wealth.(4*)


    No doubt it is true that physical peculiarities acquired by


the parents during their life-time are seldom if ever transmitted


to their offspring. But no conclusive case seems to have been


made out for the assertion that the children of those who have


led healthy lives, physically and morally, will not be born with


a firmer fibre than they would have been had the same parents


grown up under unwholesome influences which had enfeebled the


fibre of their minds and their bodies. And it is certain that in


the former case the children are likely after birth to be better


nourished, and better trained; to acquire more wholesome


instincts; and to have more of that regard for others and that


self-respect, which are the mainsprings of human progress, than


in the latter case.(5*)


    It is needful then diligently to inquire whether the present


industrial organization might not with advantage be so modified


as to increase the opportunities, which the lower grades of


industry have for using latent mental faculties, for deriving


pleasure from their use, and for strengthening them by use; since


the argument that if such a change had been beneficial, it would


have been already brought about by the struggle for survival,


must be rejected as invalid. Man's prerogative extends to a


limited but effective control over natural development by


forecasting the future and preparing the way for the next step.


    Thus progress may be hastened by thought and work; by the


application of the principles of Eugenics to the replenishment of


the race from its higher rather than its lower strains, and by


the appropriate education of the faculties of either sex: but


however hastened it must be gradual and relatively slow. It must


be slow relatively to man's growing command over technique and


the forces of nature; a command which is making ever growing


calls for courage and caution, for resource and steadfastness,


for penetrating insight and for breadth of view. And it must be


very much too slow to keep pace with the rapid inflow of


proposals for the prompt reorganization of society on a new


basis. In fact our new command over nature, while opening the


door to much larger schemes for industrial organization than were


physically possible even a short time ago, places greater


responsibilities on those who would advocate new developments of


social and industrial structure. For though institutions may be


changed rapidly; yet if they are to endure they must be


appropriate to man: they cannot retain their stability if they


change very much faster than he does. Thus progress itself


increases the urgency of the warning that in the economic world,


Natura non facit saltum.(6*)


    Progress must be slow; but even from the merely material


point of view it is to be remembered that changes, which add only


a little to the immediate efficiency of production, may be worth


having if they make mankind ready and fit for an organization,


which will be more effective in the production of wealth and more


equal in its distribution; and that every system, which allows


the higher faculties of the lower grades of industry to go to


waste, is open to grave suspicion.





NOTES:





1. See a brilliant paper by Häckel on Arbeitsteilung in Menschen-


und Tierleben and Schäffle's Bau und Leben des sozialen Körpers.





2. Like all other doctrines of the same class, this requires to


be interpreted in the light of the fact that the effective demand


of a purchaser depends on his means, as well as on his wants: a


small want on the part of a rich man often has more effective


force in controlling the business arrangements of the world than


a great want on the part of a poor man.





3. See above I, IV, section 6; and below Appendix B, sections 3


and 6.





4. Man with his many motives, as he may set himself deliberately


to encourage the growth of one peculiarity, may equally set


himself to check the growth of another: the slowness of progress


during the Middle Ages was partly due to a deliberate detestation


of learning.





5. See Note XI in the Mathematical Appendix. Considerations of


this class have little application to the development of mere


animals, such as mice; and none at all to that of peas and other


vegetables. And therefore the marvellous arithmetical results


which have been established, provisionally at all events, in


regard to heredity in such cases, have very little bearing on the


full problems of inheritance with which students of social


science are concerned: and some negative utterances on this


subject by eminent Mendelians seem to lack due reserve. Excellent


remarks on the subject will be found in Prof Pigou's Wealth and


Warfare, Part I, ch. IV.





6. Compare Appendix A, section 16.





Chapter IX





Industrial Organization, Continued.


Division of Labour.


The Influence of Machinery





    1. The first condition of an efficient organization of


industry is that it should keep everyone employed at such work as


his abilities and training fit him to do well, and should equip


him with the best machinery and other appliances for his work. We


shall leave on one side for the present the distribution of work


between those who carry out the details of production on the one


hand, and those who manage its general arrangement and undertake


its risk on the other; and confine ourselves to the division of


labour between different classes of operatives, with special


reference to the influence of machinery. In the following chapter


we shall consider the reciprocal effects of division of labour


and localization of industry; in a third chapter we shall inquire


how far the advantages of division of labour depend upon the


aggregation of large capitals into the hands of single


individuals or firms, or, as is commonly said, on production on a


large scale; and lastly, we shall examine the growing


specialization of the work of business management.


    Everyone is familiar with the fact that "practice makes


perfect," that it enables an operation, which at first seemed


difficult, to be done after a time with comparatively little


exertion, and yet much better than before; and physiology in some


measure explains this fact. For it gives reasons for believing


that the change is due to the gradual growth of new habits of


more or less "reflex" or automatic action. Perfectly reflex


actions, such as that of breathing during sleep, are performed by


the responsibility of the local nerve centres without any


reference to the supreme central authority of the thinking power,


which is supposed to reside in the cerebrum. But all deliberate


movements require the attention of the chief central authority:


it receives information from the nerve centres or local


authorities and perhaps in some cases direct from the sentient


nerves, and sends back detailed and complex instructions to the


local authorities, or in some cases direct to the muscular


nerves, and so co-ordinates their action as to bring about the


required results.(1*)


    The physiological basis of purely mental work is not yet well


understood; but what little we do know of the growth of brain


structure seems to indicate that practice in any kind of thinking


develops new connections between different parts of the brain.


Anyhow we know for a fact that practice will enable a person to


solve quickly, and without any considerable exertion, questions


which he could have dealt with but very imperfectly a little


while before, even by the greatest effort. The mind of the


merchant, the lawyer, the physician, and the man of science,


becomes gradually equipped with a store of knowledge and a


faculty of intuition, which can be obtained in no other way than


by the continual application of the best efforts of a powerful


thinker for many years together to one more or less narrow class


of questions. Of course the mind cannot work hard for many hours


a day in one direction: and a hard-worked man will sometimes find


recreation in work that does not belong to his business, but


would be fatiguing enough to a person who had to do it all day


long.


    Some social reformers have indeed maintained that those who


do the most important brain work might do a fair share of manual


work also, without diminishing their power of acquiring knowledge


or thinking out hard questions. But experience seems to show that


the best relief from overstrain is in occupations taken up to


suit the mood of the moment and stopped when the mood is passed,


that is, in what popular instinct classes as "relaxation." Any


occupation which is so far business-like that a person must


sometimes force himself by an effort of the will to go on with


it, draws on his nervous force and is not perfect relaxation: and


therefore it is not economical from the point of view of the


community unless its value is sufficient to outweigh a


considerable injury to his main work.(2*)





    2. It is a difficult and unsettled question how far


specialization should be carried in the highest branches of work.


In science it seems to be a sound rule that the area of study


should be broad during youth, and should gradually be narrowed as


years go on. A medical man who has always given his attention


exclusively to one class of diseases, may perhaps give less wise


advice even in his special subject than another who, having


learnt by wider experience to think of those diseases in relation


to general health, gradually concentrates his study more and more


on them, and accumulates a vast store of special experiences and


subtle instincts. But there is no doubt that greatly increased


efficiency can be attained through division of labour in those


occupations in which there is much demand for mere manual skill.


    Adam Smith pointed out that a lad who had made nothing but


nails all his life could make them twice as quickly as a


first-rate smith who only took to nail-making occasionally.


Anyone who has to perform exactly the same set of operations day


after day on things of exactly the same shape, gradually learns


to move his fingers exactly as they are wanted, by almost


automatic action and with greater rapidity than would be possible


if every movement had to wait for a deliberate instruction of the


will. One familiar instance is seen in the tying of threads by


children in a cotton-mill. Again, in a clothing or a boot


factory, a person who sews, whether by hand or machinery, just


the same seam on a piece of leather or cloth of just the same


size, hour after hour, day after day, is able to do it with far


less effort and far more quickly than a worker with much greater


quickness of eye and hand, and of a much higher order of general


skill, who was accustomed to make the whole of a coat or the


whole of a boot.(3*)


    Again, in the wood and the metal industries, if a man has to


perform exactly the same operations over and over again on the


same piece of material, he gets into the habit of holding it


exactly in the way in which it is wanted, and of arranging the


tools and other things which he has to handle in such positions


that he is able to bring them to work on one another with the


least possible loss of time and of force in the movements of his


own body. Accustomed to find them always in the same position and


to take them in the same order, his hands work in harmony with


one another almost automatically: and with increased practice his


expenditure of nervous force diminishes even more rapidly than


his expenditure of muscular force.


    But when the action has thus been reduced to routine it has


nearly arrived at the stage at which it can be taken over by


machinery. The chief difficulty to be overcome is that of getting


the machinery to hold the material firmly in exactly the position


in which the machine tool can be brought to bear on it in the


right way, and without wasting too much time in taking grip of


it. But this can generally be contrived when it is worth while to


spend some labour and expense on it; and then the whole operation


can often be controlled by a worker who, sitting before a


machine, takes with the left hand a piece of wood or metal from a


heap and puts it in a socket, while with the right he draws down


a lever, or in some other way sets the machine tool at work, and


finally with his left hand throws on to another heap the material


which has been cut or punched or drilled or planed exactly after


a given pattern. It is in these industries especially that we


find the reports of modern trades-unions to be full of complaints


that unskilled labourers, and even their wives and children, are


put to do work which used to require the skill and judgment of a


trained mechanic, but which has been reduced to mere routine by


the improvement of machinery and the ever-increasing minuteness


of the subdivision of labour.





    3. We are thus led to a general rule, the action of which is


more prominent in some branches of manufacture than others, but


which applies to all. It is, that any manufacturing operation


that can be reduced to uniformity, so that exactly the same thing


has to be done over and over again in the same way, is sure to be


taken over sooner or later by machinery. There may be delays and


difficulties; but if the work to be done by it is on a sufficient


scale, money and inventive power will be spent without stint on


the task till it is achieved.(4*)


    Thus the two movements of the improvement of machinery and


the growing subdivision of labour have gone together and are in


some measure connected. But the connection is not so close as is


generally supposed. It is the largeness of markets, the increased


demand for great numbers of things of the same kind, and in some


cases of things made with great accuracy, that leads to


subdivision of labour; the chief effect of the improvement of


machinery is to cheapen and make more accurate the work which


would anyhow have been subdivided. For instance, "in organizing


the works at Soho, Boulton and Watt found it necessary to carry


division of labour to the furthest practicable point. There were


no slide-lathes, planing machines or boring tools, such as now


render mechanical accuracy of construction almost a matter of


certainty. Everything depended on the individual mechanic's


accuracy of hand and eye; yet mechanics generally were much less


skilled then than they are now. The way in which Boulton and Watt


contrived partially to get over the difficulty was to confine


their workmen to special classes of work, and make them as expert


in them as possible. By continued practice in handling the same


tools and fabricating the same articles, they thus acquired great


individual proficiency."(5*) Thus machinery constantly supplants


and renders unnecessary that purely manual skill, the attainment


of which was, even up to Adam Smith's time, the chief advantage


of division of labour. But this influence is more than


countervailed by its tendency to increase the scale of


manufactures and to make them more complex; and therefore to


increase the opportunities for division of labour of all kinds,


and especially in the matter of business management.





    4. The powers of machinery to do work that requires too much


accuracy to be done by hand are perhaps best seen in some


branches of the metal industries in which the system of


Interchangeable Parts is being rapidly developed. It is only


after long training and with much care and labour that the hand


can make one piece of metal accurately to resemble or to fit into


another: and after all the accuracy is not perfect. But this is


just the work which a well made machine can do most easily and


most perfectly. For instance, if sowing and reaping machines had


to be made by hand, their first cost would be very high; and when


any part of them was broken, it could be replaced only at a great


cost by sending the machine back to the manufacturer or by


bringing a highly skilled mechanic to the machine. But as it is,


the manufacturer keeps in a store many facsimiles of the broken


part, which were made by the same machinery, and are therefore


interchangeable with it. A farmer in the North-West of America,


perhaps a hundred miles away from any good mechanic's shop, can


yet use complicated machinery with confidence; since he knows


that by telegraphing the number of the machine and the number of


any part of it which he has broken, he will get by the next train


a new piece which he can himself fit into its place. The


importance of this principle of interchangeable parts has been


but recently grasped; there are however many signs that it will


do more than any other to extend the use of machine-made


machinery to every branch of production, including even domestic


and agricultural work.(6*)


    The influences which machinery exerts over the character of


modern industry are well illustrated in the manufacture of


watches. Some years ago the chief seat of this business was in


French Switzerland; where the subdivision of labour was carried


far, though a great part of the work was done by a more or less


scattered population. There were about fifty distinct branches of


trade each of which did one small part of the work. In almost all


of them a highly specialized manual skill was required, but very


little judgment; the earnings were generally low, because the


trade had been established too long for those in it to have


anything like a monopoly, and there was no difficulty in bringing


up to it any child with ordinary intelligence. But this industry


is now yielding ground to the American system of making watches


by machinery, which requires very little specialized manual


skill. In fact the machinery is becoming every year more and more


automatic, and is getting to require less and less assistance


from the human hand. But the more delicate the machine's power,


the greater is the judgment and carefulness which is called for


from those who see after it. Take for instance a beautiful


machine which feeds itself with steel wire at one end, and


delivers at the other tiny screws of exquisite form; it displaces


a great many operatives who had indeed acquired a very high and


specialized manual skill, but who lived sedentary lives,


straining their eyesight through microscopes, and finding in


their work very little scope for any faculty except a mere


command over the use of their fingers. But the machine is


intricate and costly, and the person who minds it must have an


intelligence, and an energetic sense of responsibility, which go


a long way towards making a fine character; and which, though


more common than they were, are yet sufficiently rare to be able


to earn a very high rate of pay. No doubt this is an extreme


case; and the greater part of the work done in a watch factory is


much simpler. But much of it requires higher faculties than the


old system did, and those engaged in it earn on the average


higher wages; at the same time it has already brought the price


of a trustworthy watch within the range of the poorest classes of


the community, and it is showing signs of being able soon to


accomplish the very highest class of work.(7*)


    Those who finish and put together the different parts of a


watch must always have highly specialized skill: but most of the


machines which are in use in a watch factory are not different in


general character from those which are used in any other of the


lighter metal trades: in fact many of them are mere modifications


of the turning lathes and of the slotting, punching, drilling,


planing, shaping, milling machines and a few others, which are


familiar to all engineering trades. This is a good illustration


of the fact that while there is a constantly increasing


subdivision of labour, many of the lines of division between


trades which are nominally distinct are becoming narrower and


less difficult to be passed. In old times it would have been very


small comfort to watch-makers, who happened to be suffering from


a diminished demand for their wares, to be told that the


gun-making trade was in want of extra hands; but most of the


operatives in a watch factory would find machines very similar to


those with which they were familiar, if they strayed into a


gun-making factory or sewing-machine factory, or a factory for


making textile machinery. A watch factory with those who worked


in it could be converted without any overwhelming loss into a


sewing-machine factory; almost the only condition would be that


in the new factory no one should be put to work which required a


higher order of general intelligence, than that to which he was


already accustomed.





    5. The printing trade affords another instance of the way in


which an improvement of machinery and an increase in the volume


of production causes an elaborate subdivision of labour. Everyone


is familiar with the pioneer newspaper editor of newly settled


districts of America, who sets up the type of his articles as he


composes them; and with the aid of a boy prints off his sheets


and distributes them to his scattered neighbours. When however


the mystery of printing was new, the printer had to do all this


for himself, and in addition to make all his own appliances.(8*)


These are now provided for him by separate "subsidiary" trades,


from whom even the printer in the backwoods can obtain everything


that he wants to use. But in spite of the assistance which it


thus gets from outside, a large printing establishment has to


find room for many different classes of workers within its walls.


To say nothing of those who organize and superintend the


business, of those who do its office work and keep its stores, of


the skilled "readers" who correct any errors that may have crept


into the "proofs," of its engineers and repairers of machinery,


of those who cast, and who correct and prepare its stereotype


plates; of the warehousemen and the boys and girls who assist


them, and several other minor classes; there are the two great


groups of the compositors who set up the type, and the machinists


and pressmen who print impressions from them. Each of these two


groups is divided into many smaller groups, especially in the


large centres of the printing trade. In London, for instance, a


minder who was accustomed to one class of machine, or a


compositor who was accustomed to one class of work, if thrown out


of employment would not willingly abandon the advantage of his


specialized skill, and falling back on his general knowledge of


the trade seek work at another kind of machine or in another


class of work.(9*) These barriers between minute subdivisions of


a trade count for a great deal in many descriptions of the modern


tendency towards specialization of industry; and to some extent


rightly, because though many of them are so slight that a man


thrown out of work in one subdivision could pass into one of its


neighbours without any great loss of efficiency, yet he does not


do so until he has tried for a while to get employment in his old


lines; and therefore the barriers are as effective as stronger


ones would be so far as the minor fluctuations of trade from week


to week are concerned. But they are of an altogether different


kind from the deep and broad partitions which divided one group


of medieval handicraftsmen from another, and which caused the


lifelong suffering of the handloom-weavers when their trade had


left them.(10*)


    In the printing trades, as in the watch trade, we see


mechanical and scientific appliances attaining results that would


be impossible without them; at the same time that they


persistently take over work that used to require manual skill and


dexterity, but not much judgment; while they leave for man's hand


all those parts which do require the use of judgment, and open up


all sorts of new occupations in which there is a great demand for


it. Every improvement and cheapening of the printer's appliances


increases the demand for the judgment and discretion and literary



knowledge of the reader, for the skill and taste of those who


know how to set up a good title-page, or how to make ready a


sheet on which an engraving is to be printed, so that light and


shade will be distributed properly. It increases the demand for


the gifted and highly-trained artists who draw or engrave on wood


and stone and metal, and for those who know how to give an


accurate report in ten lines of the substance of a speech that


occupied ten minutes -- an intellectual feat the difficulty of


which we underrate, because it is so frequently performed. And


again, it tends to increase the work of photographers and


electrotypers, and stereotypers, of the makers of printer's


machinery, and many others who get a higher training and a higher


income from their work than did those layers on and takers off,


and those folders of newspapers who have found their work taken


over by iron fingers and iron arms.





    6. We may now pass to consider the effects which machinery


has in relieving that excessive muscular strain which a few


generations ago was the common lot of more than half the working


men even in such a country as England. The most marvellous


instances of the power of machinery are seen in large iron-works,


and especially in those for making armour plates, where the force


to be exerted is so great that man's muscles count for nothing,


and where every movement, whether horizontal or vertical, has to


be effected by hydraulic or steam force, and man stands by ready


to govern the machinery and clear away ashes or perform some such


secondary task.


    Machinery of this class has increased our command over


nature, but it has not directly altered the character of man's


work very much; for that which it does he could not have done


without it. But in other trades machinery has lightened man's


labours. The house carpenters, for instance, make things of the


same kind as those used by our forefathers, with much less toil


for themselves. They now give themselves chiefly to those parts


of the task which are most pleasant and most interesting; while


in every country town and almost every village there are found


steam mills for sawing, planing and moulding, which relieve them


of that grievous fatigue which not very long ago used to make


them prematurely old.(11*)


    New machinery, when just invented, generally requires a great


deal of care and attention. But the work of its attendant is


always being sifted; that which is uniform and monotonous is


gradually taken over by the machine, which thus becomes steadily


more and more automatic and self-acting; till at last there is


nothing for the hand to do, but to supply the material at certain


intervals and to take away the work when finished. There still


remains the responsibility for seeing that the machinery is in


good order and working smoothly; but even this task is often made


light by the introduction of an automatic movement, which brings


he machine to a stop the instant anything goes wrong.


    Nothing could be more narrow or monotonous than the


occupation of a weaver of plain stuffs in the old time. But now


one woman will manage four or more looms, each of which does many


times as much work in the course of the day as the old hand-loom


did; and her work is much less monotonous and calls for much more


judgment than his did. So that for every hundred yards of cloth


that are woven, the purely monotonous work done by human beings


is probably not a twentieth part of what it was.(12*)


    Facts of this kind are to be found in the recent history of


many trades: and they are of great importance when we are


considering the way in which the modern organization of industry


is tending to narrow the scope of each person's work, and thereby


to render it monotonous. For those trades in which the work is


most subdivided are those in which the chief muscular strain is


most certain to be taken off by machinery; and thus the chief


evil of monotonous work is much diminished. As Roscher says, it


is monotony of life much more than monotony of work that is to be


dreaded: monotony of work is an evil of the first order only when


it involves monotony of life. Now when a person's employment


requires much physical exertion, he is fit for nothing after his


work; and unless his mental faculties are called forth in his


work, they have little chance of being developed at all. But the


nervous force is not very much exhausted in the ordinary work of


a factory, at all events where there is not excessive noise, and


where the hours of labour are not too long. The social


surroundings of factory life stimulate mental activity in and out


of working hours; and many of those factory workers, whose


occupations are seemingly the most monotonous, have considerable


intelligence and mental resource.(13*)


    It is true that the American agriculturist is an able man,


and that his children rise rapidly in the world. But partly


because land is plentiful, and he generally owns the farm that he


cultivates, he has better social conditions than the English; he


has always had to think for himself, and has long had to use and


to repair complex machines. The English agricultural labourer has


had many great disadvantages to contend with. Till recently he


had little education; and he was in a great measure under a


semi-feudal rule, which was not without its advantages, but which


repressed enterprise and even in some degree self-respect. These


narrowing causes are removed. He is now fairly well educated in


youth. He learns to handle various machinery; he is less


dependent on the good-will of any particular squire or group of


farmers; and, since his work is more various, and educates


intelligence more than the lowest grades of town work do, he is


tending to rise both absolutely and relatively.





    7. We must now proceed to consider what are the conditions


under which the economies in production arising from division of


labour can best be secured. It is obvious that the efficiency of


specialized machinery or specialized skill is but one condition


of its economic use; the other is that sufficient work should be


found to keep it well employed. As Babbage pointed out, in a


large factory "the master manufacturer by dividing the work to be


executed into different processes, each requiring different


degrees of skill or force, can purchase exactly that precise


quantity of both which is necessary for each process; whereas if


the whole work were executed by one workman that person must


possess sufficient skill to perform the most difficult and


sufficient strength to execute the most laborious of the


operations into which the work is divided." The economy of


production requires not only that each person should be employed


constantly in a narrow range of work, but also that, when it is


necessary for him to undertake different tasks, each of these


tasks should be such as to call forth as much as possible of his


skill and ability. Just in the same way the economy of machinery


requires that a powerful turning-lathe when specially arranged


for one class of work should be kept employed as long as possible


on that work; and if there is occasion to employ it on other


work, that should be such as to be worthy of the lathe, and not


such as could have been done equally well by a much smaller


machine.


    Here then, so far as the economy of production goes, men and


machines stand on much the same footing: but while machinery is a


mere implement of production, man's welfare is also its ultimate


aim. We have already been occupied with the question whether the


human race as a whole gains by carrying to an extreme that


specialization of function which causes all the most difficult


work to be done by a few people: but we have now to consider it


more nearly with special reference to the work of business


management. The main drift of the next three chapters is to


inquire what are the causes which make different forms of


business management the fittest to profit by their environment,


and the most likely to prevail over others; but it is well that


meanwhile we should have in our minds the question, how far they


are severally fitted to benefit their environment.


    Many of those economies in the use of specialized skill and


machinery which are commonly regarded as within the reach of very


large establishments, do not depend on the size of individual


factories. Some depend on the aggregate volume of production of


the kind in the neighbourhood; while others again, especially


those connected with the growth of knowledge and the progress of


the arts, depend chiefly on the aggregate volume of production in


the whole civilized world. And here we may introduce two


technical terms.


    We may divide the economies arising from an increase in the


scale of production of any kind of goods, into two classes --


firstly, those dependent on the general development of the


industry; and, secondly, those dependent on the resources of the


individual houses of business engaged in it, on their


organization and the efficiency of their management. We may call


the former external economies, and the latter internal economies.


In the present chapter we have been chiefly discussing internal


economies; but we now proceed to examine those very important


external economies which can often be secured by the


concentration of many small businesses of a similar character in


particular localities: or, as is commonly said, by the


localization of industry.





NOTES:





1. For instance, the first time a man attempts to skate he must


give his whole attention to keeping his balance, his cerebrum has


to exercise a direct control over every movement, and he has not


much mental energy left for other things. But after a good deal


of practice the action becomes semi-automatic, the local nerve


centres undertake nearly all the work of regulating the muscles,


the cerebrum is set free, and the man can carry on an independent


train of thought; he can even alter his course to avoid an


obstacle in his path, or to recover his balance after it has been


disturbed by a slight unevenness, without in any way interrupting


the course of his thoughts. It seems that the exercise of nerve


force under the immediate direction of the thinking power


residing in the cerebrum has gradually built up a set of


connections, involving probably distinct physical change, between


the nerves and nerve centres concerned; and these new connections


may be regarded as a sort of capital of nerve force. There is


probably something like an organized bureaucracy of the local


nerve centres: the medulla, the spinal axis, and the larger


ganglia generally acting the part of provincial authorities, and


being able after a time to regulate the district and village


authorities without troubling the supreme government. Very likely


they send up messages as to what is going on: but if nothing much


out of the way has happened, these are very little attended to.


When however a new feat has to be accomplished, as for instance


learning to skate backwards, the whole thinking force will be


called into requisition for the time; and will now be able by aid


of the special skating organization of the nerves and nerve


centres, which has been built up in ordinary skating, to do what


would have been altogether impossible without such aid.


    To take a higher instance: when an artist is painting at his


best, his cerebrum is fully occupied with his work: his whole


mental force is thrown into it, and the strain is too great to be


kept up for a long time together. In a few hours of happy


inspiration he may give utterance to thoughts that exert a


perceptible influence on the character of coming generations. But


his power of expression had been earned by numberless hours of


plodding work in which he had gradually built up an intimate


connection between eye and hand, sufficient to enable him to make


good rough sketches of things with which he is tolerably


familiar, even while he is engaged in an engrossing conversation


and is scarcely conscious that he has a pencil in his hand.





2. J. S. Mill went so far as to maintain that his occupations at


the India Office did not interfere with his pursuit of


philosophical inquiries. But it seems probable that this


diversion of his freshest powers lowered the quality of his best


thought more than he was aware; and though it may have diminished


but little his remarkable usefulness in his own generation, it


probably affected very much his power of doing that kind of work


which influences the course of thought in future generations. It


was by husbanding every atom of his small physical strength that


Darwin was enabled to do so much work of just that kind: and a


social reformer who had succeeded in exploiting Darwin' s leisure


hours in useful work on behalf of the community, would have done


a very bad piece of business for it.





3. The best and most expensive clothes are made by highly skilled


and highly paid tailors, each of whom works right through first


one garment and then another: while the cheapest and worst


clothes are made for starvation wages by unskilled women who take


the cloth to their own homes and do every part of the sewing


themselves. But clothes of intermediate qualities are made in


workshops or factories, in which the division and subdivisions of


labour are carried as far as the size of the staff will permit;


and this method is rapidly gaining ground at both ends at the


expense of the rival method. Lord Lauderdale (Inquiry, p. 282)


quotes Xenophon's argument that the best work is done when each


confines himself to one simple department, as when one man makes


shoes for men, and another for women; or better when one man only


sews shoes or garments, another cuts them out: the king's cooking


is much better than anybody else's, because he has one cook who


only boils, another who only roasts meat; one who only boils


fish, another who only fries it: there is not one man to make all


sorts of bread but a special man for special qualities.





4. One great inventor is rumoured to have spent ?00,000 on


experiments relating to textile machinery, and his outlay is said


to have been abundantly returned to him. Some of his inventions


were of such a kind as can be made only by a man of genius; and


however great the need, they must have waited till the right man


was found for them. He charged not unreasonably ?000 as royalty


for each of his combing machines; and a worsted manufacturer,


being full of work, found it worth his while to buy an additional


machine, and pay this extra charge for it, only six months before


the expiry of the patent. But such cases are exceptional: as a


rule, patented machines are not very dear. In some cases the


economy of having them all produced at one place by special


machinery has been so great that the patentee has found it to his


advantage to sell them at a price lower than the old price of the


inferior machines which they displaced: for that old price gave


him so high a profit, that it was worth his while to lower the


price still further in order to induce the use of the machines


for new purposes and in new markets. In almost every trade many


things are done by hand, though it is well known that they could


easily be done by some adaptations of machines that are already


in use in that or some other trade, and which are not made only


because there would not as yet be enough employment for them to


remunerate the trouble and expense of making them.





5. Smiles, Boulton and Watts, pp. 170-1.





6. The system owes its origin in great measure to Sir Joseph


Whitworth's standard gauges; but it has been worked out with most


enterprise and thoroughness in America. Standardization is most


helpful in regard to things which are to be built up with others


into complex machines, buildings, bridges, etc.





7. The perfection which the machinery has already attained is


shown by the fact that at the Inventions Exhibition held in


London in 1885, the representative of an American watch factory


took to pieces fifty watches before some English representatives


of the older system of manufacture, and after throwing the


different parts into different heaps, asked them to select for


him one piece from each heap in succession; he then set these


pieces up in one of the watch-cases and handed them back a watch


in perfect order.





8. "The type-founder was probably the first to secede from the


concern; then printers delegated to others the making of presses;


afterwards the ink and the rollers found separate and distinct


manufacturers; and there arose a class of persons who, though


belonging to other trades, made printing appliances a speciality,


such as printers' smiths, printers' joiners and printers'


engineers" (Mr Southward in the Article on Typography in the


Encyclopaedia Britannica).





9. For instance, Mr Southward tells us "a minder may understand


only book machines or only news machines; he may know all about"


machines that print from flat surfaces or those that print from


cylinders; "or of cylinders he may know only one kind. Entirely


novel machines create a new class of artisans. There are men


perfectly competent to manage a Walter press who are ignorant how


to work two-colour or fine book-work machines. In the


compositor's department division of labour is carried out to a


still minuter degree. An old-fashioned printer would set up


indifferently a placard, a title-page, or a book. At the present


day we have jobbing hands, book hands, and news hands, the word


'hand' suggesting the factory-like nature of the business. There


are jobbing hands who confine themselves to posters. Book hands


comprise those who set up the titles and those who set up the


body of the work. Of these latter again, while one man composes,


another, the 'maker-up,' arranges the pages."





10. Let us follow still further the progress of machinery in


supplanting manual labour in some directions and opening out new


fields for its employment in others. Let us watch the process by


which large editions of a great newspaper are set up and printed


off in a few hours. To begin with, a good part of the


type-setting is itself often done by a machine; but in any case


the types are in the first instance on a plane surface, from


which it is impossible to print very rapidly. The next step


therefore is to make a papier-mach?cast of them, which is bent


on to a cylinder, and is then used as the mould from which a new


metal plate is cast that fits the cylinders of the printing


machine. Fixed on these it rotates alternately against the inking


cylinders and the paper. The paper is arranged in a huge roll at


the bottom of the machine and unrolls itself automatically, first


against the damping cylinders and then against the printing


cylinders, the first of which prints it on one side, and the


second on the other: thence to the cutting cylinders, which cut


it into equal lengths, and thence to the folding apparatus, which


folds it ready for sale.


    More recently the casting of the type has been brought under


the new methods. The compositor plays on a keyboard like that of


the type-writer, and the matrix of a corresponding letter goes


into line: then after spacing out, molten lead is poured on the


line of matrices, and a solid line of type is ready . And in a


further development each letter is cast separately from its


matrix; the machine reckons up the space taken by the letters,


stops when there are enough for a line, divides out the free


space equally into the requisite number of small spaces between



the words; and finally casts the line. It is claimed that one


compositor can work several such machines simultaneously in


distant towns by electric currents.





11. The jack-plane, used for making smooth large boards for


floors and other purposes, used to cause heart disease, making


carpenters as a rule old men by the time they were forty . Adam


Smith tells us that "workmen, when they are liberally paid, are


very apt to overwork themselves and to ruin their health and


constitution in a few years. A carpenter in London, and in some


other places, is not supposed to last in his utmost vigour above


eight years... Almost every class of artificers is subject to


some particular infirmity occasioned by excessive application to


their peculiar species of work." Wealth of Nations, Book I,


chapter VII.





12. The efficiency of labour in weaving has been increased twelve


fold and that in spinning six fold during the last seventy years.


In the preceding seventy years the improvements in spinning had


already increased the efficiency of labour two-hundred-fold (see


Ellison's Cotton Trade of Great Britain, ch. IV and V).





13. Perhaps the textile industries afford the best instance of


work that used to be done by hand and is now done by machinery


They are especially prominent in England, where they give


employment to nearly half a million males and more than half a


million females, or more than one in ten of those persons who are


earning independent incomes. The strain that is taken off human


muscles in dealing even with those soft materials is shown by the


fact that for every one of these million operatives there is used


about one horse-power of steam, that is, about ten times as much


as they would themselves exert if they were all strong men; and


the history of these industries will serve to remind us that many


of those who perform the more monotonous parts of manufacturing


work are as a rule not skilled workers who have come down to it


from a higher class of work, but unskilled workers who have risen


to it. A great number of those who work in the Lancashire


cotton-mills have come there from poverty-stricken districts of


Ireland, while others are the descendants of paupers and people


of weak physique, who were sent there in large numbers early in


the last century from the most miserable conditions of life in


the poorest agricultural districts, where the labourers were fed


and housed almost worse than the animals whom they tended. Again,


when regret is expressed that the cotton factory hands of New


England have not the high standard of culture which prevailed


among them a century ago, we must remember that the descendants


of those factory workers have moved up to higher and more


responsible posts, and include many of the ablest and wealthiest


of the citizens of America. Those who have taken their places are


in the process of being raised; they are chiefly French Canadians


and Irish, who though they may learn in their new homes some of


the vices of civilization, are yet much better off and have on


the whole better opportunities of developing the higher faculties


of themselves and their children than they had in their old


homes.








Chapter X





Industrial Organization Continued.


The Concentration of Specialized Industries in Particular


Localities





    1. In an early stage of civilization every place had to


depend on its own resources for most of the heavy wares which it


consumed; unless indeed it happened to have special facilities


for water carriage. But wants and customs changed slowly: and


this made it easy for producers to meet the wants even of


consumers with whom they had little communication; and it enabled


comparatively poor people to buy a few expensive goods from a


distance, in the security that they would add to the pleasure of


festivals and holidays during a life-time, or perhaps even during


two or three lifetimes. Consequently the lighter and more


expensive articles of dress and personal adornment, together with


spices and some kinds of metal implements used by all classes,


and many other things for the special use of the rich, often came


from astonishing distances. Some of these were produced only in a


few places, or even only in one place; and they were diffused all


over Europe partly by the agency of fairs(1*) and professional


pedlers, and partly by the producers themselves, who would vary


their work by travelling on foot for many thousand miles to sell


their goods and see the world. These sturdy travellers took on


themselves the risks of their little businesses; they enabled the


production of certain classes of goods to be kept on the right


track for satisfying the needs of purchasers far away; and they


created new wants among consumers, by showing them at fairs or at


their own houses new goods from distant lands. An industry


concentrated in certain localities is commonly, though perhaps


not quite accurately, described as a localized industry.(2*)


    This elementary localization of industry gradually prepared


the way for many of the modern developments of division of labour


in the mechanical arts and in the task of business management.


Even now we find industries of a primitive fashion localized in


retired villages of central Europe, and sending their simple


wares even to the busiest haunts of modern industry. In Russia


the expansion of a family group into a village has often been the


cause of a localized industry; and there are an immense number of


villages each of which carries on only one branch of production,


or even only a part of one.(3*)





    2. Many various causes have led to the localization of


industries; but the chief causes have been physical conditions;


such as the character of the climate and the soil, the existence


of mines and quarries in the neighbourhood, or within easy access


by land or water. Thus metallic industries have generally been


either near mines or in places where fuel was cheap. The iron


industries in England first sought those districts in which


charcoal was plentiful, and afterwards they went to the


neighbourhood of collieries.(4*) Staffordshire makes many kinds


of pottery, all the materials of which are imported from a long


distance; but she has cheap coal and excellent clay for making


the heavy "saggars" or boxes in which the pottery is placed while


being fired. Straw plaiting has its chief home in Bedfordshire,


where straw has just the right proportion of silex to give


strength without brittleness; and Buckinghamshire beeches have


afforded the material for the Wycombe chairmaking. The Sheffield


cutlery trade is due chiefly to the excellent grit of which its


grindstones are made.


    Another chief cause has been the patronage of a court. The


rich folk there assembled make a demand for goods of specially


high quality, and this attracts skilled workmen from a distance,


and educates those on the spot. When an Eastern potentate changed


his residence -- and, partly for sanitary reasons, this was


constantly done -- the deserted town was apt to take refuge in


the development of a specialized industry, which had owed its


origin to the presence of the court. But very often the rulers


deliberately invited artisans from a distance and settled them in


a group together. Thus the mechanical faculty of Lancashire is


said to be due to the influence of Norman smiths who were settled


at Warrington by Hugo de Lupus in William the Conqueror's time.


And the greater part of England's manufacturing industry before


the era of cotton and steam had its course directed by


settlements of Flemish and other artisans; many of which were


made under the immediate direction of Plantagenet and Tudor


kings. These immigrants taught us how to weave woollen and


worsted stuffs, though for a long time we sent our cloths to the


Netherlands to be fulled and dyed. They taught us how to cure


herrings, how to manufacture silk, how to make lace, glass, and


paper, and to provide for many other of our wants.(5*)


    But how did these immigrants learn their skill? Their


ancestors had no doubt profited by the traditional arts of


earlier civilizations on the shores of the Mediterranean and in


the far East: for nearly all important knowledge has long deep


roots stretching downwards to distant times; and so widely spread


have been these roots, so ready to send up shoots of vigorous


life, that there is perhaps no part of the old world in which


there might not long ago have flourished many beautiful and


highly skilled industries, if their growth had been favoured by


the character of the people, and by their social and political


institutions. This accident or that may have determined whether


any particular industry flourished in any one town; the


industrial character of a whole country even may have been


largely influenced by the richness of her soil and her mines, and


her facilities for commerce. Such natural advantages may


themselves have stimulated free industry and enterprise: but it


is the existence of these last, by whatever means they may have


been promoted, which has been the supreme condition for the


growth of noble forms of the arts of life. In stretching the


history of free industry and enterprise we have already


incidentally traced the outlines of the causes which have


localized the industrial leadership of the world now in this


country and now in that. We have seen how physical nature acts on


man's energies, how he is stimulated by an invigorating climate,


and how he is encouraged to bold ventures by the opening out of


rich fields for his work: but we have also seen how the use he


makes of these advantages depends on his ideals of life, and how


inextricably therefore the religious, political and economic


threads of the world's history are interwoven; while together


they have been bent this way or that by great political events


and the influence of the strong personalities of individuals.


    The causes which determine the economic progress of nations


belong to the study of international trade and therefore lie


outside of our present view. But for the present we must turn


aside from these broader movements of the localization of


industry, and follow the fortunes of groups of skilled workers


who are gathered within the narrow boundaries of a manufacturing


town or a thickly peopled industrial district.





    3. When an industry has thus chosen a locality for itself, it


is likely to stay there long: so great are the advantages which


people following the same skilled trade get from near


neighbourhood to one another. The mysteries of the trade become


no mysteries; but are as it were in the air, and children learn


many of them unconsciously. Good work is rightly appreciated,


inventions and improvements in machinery, in processes and the


general organization of the business have their merits promptly


discussed: if one man starts a new idea, it is taken up by others


and combined with suggestions of their own; and thus it becomes


the source of further new ideas. And presently subsidiary trades


grow up in the neighbourhood, supplying it with implements and


materials, organizing its traffic, and in many ways conducing to


the economy of its material.


    Again, the economic use of expensive machinery can sometimes


be attained in a very high degree in a district in which there is


a large aggregate production of the same kind, even though no


individual capital employed in the trade be very large. For


subsidiary industries devoting themselves each to one small


branch of the process of production, and working it for a great


many of their neighbours, are able to keep in constant use


machinery of the most highly specialized character, and to make


it pay its expenses, though its original cost may have been high,


and its rate of depreciation very rapid.


    Again, in all but the earliest stages of economic development


a localized industry gains a great advantage from the fact that


it offers a constant market for skill. Employers are apt to


resort to any place where they are likely to find a good choice


of workers with the special skill which they require; while men


seeking employment naturally go to places where there are many


employers who need such skill as theirs and where therefore it is


likely to find a good market. The owner of an isolated factory,


even if he has access to a plentiful supply of general labour, is


often put to great shifts for want of some special skilled


labour; and a skilled workman, when thrown out of employment in


it, has no easy refuge. Social forces here co-operate with


economic: there are often strong friendships between employers


and employed: but neither side likes to feel that in case of any


disagreeable incident happening between them, they must go on


rubbing against one another: both sides like to be able easily to


break off old associations should they become irksome. These


difficulties are still a great obstacle to the success of any


business in which special skill is needed, but which is not in


the neighbourhood of others like it: they are however being


diminished by the railway, the printing-press and the telegraph.


    On the other hand a localized industry has some disadvantages


as a market for labour if the work done in it is chiefly of one


kind, such for instance as can be done only by strong men. In


those iron districts in which there are no textile or other


factories to give employment to women and children, wages are


high and the cost of labour dear to the employer, while the


average money earnings of each family are low. But the remedy for


this evil is obvious, and is found in the growth in the same


neighbourhood of industries of a supplementary character. Thus


textile industries are constantly found congregated in the


neighbourhood of mining and engineering industries, in some cases


having been attracted by almost imperceptible steps; in others,


as for instance at Barrow, having been started deliberately on a


large scale in order to give variety of employment in a place


where previously there had been but little demand for the work of


women and children.


    The advantages of variety of employment are combined with


those of localized industries in some of our manufacturing towns,


and this is a chief cause of their continued growth. But on the


other hand the value which the central sites of a large town have


for trading purposes, enables them to command much higher


ground-rents than the situations are worth for factories, even


when account is taKen of this combination of advantages: and


there is a similar competition for dwelling space between the


employees of the trading houses and the factory workers. The


result is that factories now congregate in the outskirts of large


towns and in manufacturing districts in their neighbourhood


rather than in the towns themselves.(6*)


    A district which is dependent chiefly on one industry is


liable to extreme depression, in case of a falling-off in the


demand for its produce, or of a failure in the supply of the raw


material which it uses. This evil again is in a great measure


avoided by those large towns or large industrial districts in


which several distinct industries are strongly developed. If one


of them fails for a time, the others are likely to support it


indirectly; and they enable local shopkeepers to continue their


assistance to workpeople in it.


    So far we have discussed localization from the point of view


of the economy of production. But there is also the convenience


of the customer to be considered. He will go to the nearest shop


for a trifling purchase; but for an important purchase he will


take the trouble of visiting any part of the town where he knows


that there are specially good shops for his purpose. Consequently


shops which deal in expensive and choice objects tend to


congregate together; and those which supply ordinary domestic


needs do not.(7*)





    4. Every cheapening of the means of communication, every new


facility for the free interchange of ideas between distant places


alters the action of the forces which tend to localize


industries. Speaking generally we must say that a lowering of


tariffs, or of freights for the transport of goods, tends to make


each locality buy more largely from a distance what it requires;


and thus tends to concentrate particular industries in special


localities: but on the other hand everything that increases


people's readiness to migrate from one place to another tends to


bring skilled artisans to ply their crafts near to the consumers


who will purchase their wares. These two opposing tendencies are


well illustrated by the recent history of the English people.


    On the one hand the steady cheapening of freights, the


opening of railways from the agricultural districts of America


and India to the sea-board, and the adoption by England of a


free-trade policy, have led to a great increase in her


importation of raw produce. But on the other hand the growing


cheapness, rapidity and comfort of foreign travel, are inducing


her trained business men and her skilled artisans to pioneer the


way for new industries in other lands, and to help them to


manufacture for themselves goods which they have been wont to buy


from England. English mechanics have taught people in almost


every part of the world how to use English machinery, and even


how to make similar machinery; and English miners have opened out


mines of ore which have diminished the foreign demand for many of


England's products.


    One of the most striking movements towards the specialization


of a country's industries, which history records, is the rapid


increase of the non-agricultural population of England in recent


times. The exact nature of this change is however liable to be


misunderstood; and its interest is so great, both for its own


sake, and on account of the illustrations it affords of the


general principles which we have been discussing in the preceding


chapter and in this, that we may with advantage pause here to


consider it a little.


    In the first place, the real diminution of England's


agricultural industries is not so great as at first sight


appears. It is true that in the Middle Ages three-fourths of the


people were reckoned as agriculturists; that only one in nine was


returned to the last census as engaged in agriculture, and that


perhaps not more than one in twelve will be so returned at the


next census. But it must be remembered that the so-called


agricultural population of the Middle Ages were not exclusively


occupied with agriculture; they did for themselves a great part


of the work that is now done by brewers and bakers, by spinners


and weavers, by bricklayers and carpenters, by dressmakers and


tailors and by many other trades. These self-sufficing habits


died slowly; but most of them had nearly disappeared by the


beginning of the last century; and it is probable that the labour


spent on the land at this time was not a much less part of the


whole industry of the country than in the Middle Ages: for, in


spite of her ceasing to export wool and wheat, there was so great


an increase in the produce forced from her soil, that the rapid


improvement in the arts of her agriculturists scarcely availed to


hold in check the action of the law of diminishing return. But


gradually a great deal of labour has been diverted from the


fields to making expensive machinery for agricultural purposes.


This change did not exert its full influence upon the numbers of


those who were reckoned as agriculturists so long as the


machinery was drawn by horses: for the work of tending them and


supplying them with food was regarded as agricultural. But in


recent years a rapid growth of the use of steam power in the


fields has coincided with the increased importation of farm


produce. The coal-miners who supply these steam-engines with


fuel, and the mechanics who make them and manage them in the


fields are not reckoned as occupied on the land, though the


ultimate aim of their labour is to promote its cultivation. The


real diminution then of England's agriculture is not so great as


at first sight appears; but there has been a change in its


distribution. Many tasks which used once to be performed by


agricultural labourers are now done by specialized workers who


are classed as in the building, or road-making industries, as


carriers and so on. And, partly for this reason the number of


people who reside in purely agricultural districts has seldom


diminished fast; and has often increased, even though the number


of those engaged in agriculture has been diminishing rapidly.


    Attention has already been called to the influence which the


importation of agricultural produce exerts in altering the


relative values of different soils: those falling most in value


which depended chiefly on their wheat crops, and which were not


naturally fertile, though they were capable of being made to


yield fairly good crops by expensive methods of cultivation.


Districts in which such soils predominate, have contributed more


than their share to the crowds of agricultural labourers who have


migrated to the large towns; and thus the geographical


distribution of industries within the country has been still


further altered. A striking instance of the influence of the new


means of transport is seen in those pastoral districts in the


remoter parts of the United Kingdom, which send dairy products by


special express trains to London and other large towns, meanwhile


drawing their own supplies of wheat from the further shores of


the Atlantic or even the Pacific Ocean.


    But next, the changes of recent years have not, as would at


first sight appear probable, increased the proportion of the


English people who are occupied in manufactures. The output of


England's manufactures is certainly many times as great now as it


was at the middle of the last century; but those occupied in


manufacture of every kind were as large a percentage of the


population in 1851 as in 1901; although those who make the


machinery and implements which do a great part of the work of


English agriculture, swell the numbers of the manufacturers.


    The chief explanation of this result lies in the wonderful


increase in recent years of the power of machinery. This has


enabled us to produce ever increasing supplies of manufactures of


almost every kind both for our own use and for exportation


without requiring any considerable increase in the number of


people who tend the machines. And therefore we have been able to


devote the labour set free from agriculture chiefly to supplying


those wants in regard to which the improvements of machinery help


us but little: the efficiency of machinery has prevented the


industries localized in England from becoming as exclusively


mechanical as they otherwise would. Prominent among the


occupations which have increased rapidly since 1851 in England at


the expense of agriculture are the service of Government, central


and local; education of all grades; medical service; musical,


theatrical and other entertainments, besides mining, building,


dealing and transport by road and railway. In none of these is


very much direct help got from new inventions: man's labour is


not much more efficient in them now than it was a century ago:


and therefore if the wants for which they make provision increase


in proportion to our general wealth, it is only to be expected


that they should absorb a constantly growing proportion of the


industrial population. Domestic servants increased rapidly for


some years; and the total amount of work which used to fall to


them is now increasing faster than ever. But much of it is now


done, often with the aid of machinery, by persons in the


employment of clothiers of all kinds, of hotel proprietors,


confectioners, and even by various messengers from grocers,


fishmongers and others who call for orders, unless they are sent


by telephone. These changes have tended to increase the


specialization and the localization of industries.


    Passing away from this illustration of the action of modern


forces on the geographical distribution of industries, we will


resume our inquiry as to how far the full economies of division


of labour can be obtained by the concentration of large numbers


of small businesses of a similar kind in the same locality; and


how far they are attainable only by the aggregation of a large


part of the business of the country into the hands of a


comparatively small number of rich and powerful firms, or, as is


commonly said, by production on a large scale; or, in other


words, how far the economies of production on a large scale must


needs be internal, and how far they can be external.(8*)





NOTES:





1. Thus in the records of the Stourbridge Fair held near


Cambridge we find an endless variety of light and precious goods


from the older seats of civilization in the East and on the


Mediterranean; some having been brought in Italian ships, and


others having travelled by land as far as the shores of the North


Sea.





2. Not very long ago travellers in western Tyrol could find a


strange and characteristic relic of this habit in a village


called Imst. The villagers had somehow acquired a special art in


breeding canaries: and their young men started for a tour to


distant parts of Europe each with about fifty small cages hung


from a pole over his shoulder, and walked on till they had sold


all.





3. There are for instance over 500 villages devoted to various


branches of woodwork; one village makes nothing but spokes for


the wheels of vehicles, another nothing but the bodies and so on;


and indications of a like state of things are found in the


histories of oriental civilizations and in the chronicles of


medieval Europe. Thus for instance we read (Rogers' Six Centuries


of Work and Wages, ch. IV) of a lawyer's handy book written about


1250, which makes note of scarlet at Lincoln; blanket at Bligh;


burnet at Beverley; russet at Colchester; linen fabrics at


Shaftesbury, Lewes, and Aylsham; cord at Warwick and Bridport;


knives at Marstead; needles at Wilton; razors at Leicester; soap


at Coventry; horse girths at Doncaster; skins and furs at Chester


and Shrewsbury and so on.


    The localization of trades in England at the beginning of the


eighteenth century is well described by Defoe, Plan of English


Commerce, 85-7; English Tradesman, II, 282-3.





4. The later wanderings of the iron industry from Wales,


Staffordshire and Shropshire to Scotland and the North of England


are well shown in the tables submitted by Sir Lowthian Bell to


the recent Commission on the Depression of Trade and Industry.


See their Second Report, Part I, p. 320.





5. Fuller says that Flemings started manufactures of cloths and


fustians in Norwich, of baizes in Sudbury, of serges in


Colchester and Taunton, of cloths in Kent, Gloucestershire,


Worcestershire, Westmorland, Yorkshire, Hants, Berks and Sussex,


of kerseys in Devonshire and of Levant cottons in Lancashire.


Smiles' Huguenots in England and Ireland, p. 109. See also


Lecky's History of England in the eighteenth century, ch. II.





6. The movement has been specially conspicuous in the case of the


textile manufacturers. Manchester, Leeds and Lyons are still


chief centres of the trade in cotton, woollen and silk stuffs,


but they do not now themselves produce any great part of the


goods to which they owe their chief fame. On the other hand


London and Paris retain their positions as the two largest


manufacturing towns of the world, Philadelphia coming third. The


mutual influences of the localization of industry, the growth of


towns and habits of town life, and the development of machinery


are well discussed in Hobson's Evolution of Capitalism.





7. Comp. Hobson, l. c. p. 114.





8. The percentage of the population occupied in the textile


industries in the United Kingdom fell from 3.13 in 1881 to 2.43


in 1901; partly because much of the work done by them has been


rendered so simple by semi-automatic machinery that it can be


done fairly well by peoples that are in a relatively backward


industrial condition; and partly because the chief textile goods


retain nearly the same simple character as they had thirty or


even three thousand years ago. On the other hand manufactures of


iron and steel (including shipbuilding) have increased so greatly


in complexity as well as in volume of output, that the percentage


of the population occupied in them rose from 2.39 in 1881 to 3.01


in 1901; although much greater advance has been meanwhile made in


the machinery and methods employed in them than in the textile


group. The remaining manufacturing industries employed about the


same percentage of the people in 1901 as in 1881. In the same


time the tonnage of British shipping cleared from British ports


increased by one half; and the number of dock labourers doubled,


but that of seamen has slightly diminished. These facts are to be


explained partly by vast improvements in the construction of


ships and all appliances connected with them, and partly by the


transference to dock labourers of nearly all tasks connected with


handling the cargo some of which were even recently performed by


the crew. Another marked change is the increased aggregate


occupation of women in manufactures, though that of married women


appears to have diminished, and that of children has certainly


diminished greatly.


    The Summary Tables of the Census of 1911, published in 1915,


show so many changes in classification since 1991 that no general


view of recent developments can be safely made. But Table 64 of


that Report and Prof. D. Caradog Jones' paper read before the


Royal Statistical Society in December 1914 show that the


developments of 1901-11 differ from their predecessors in detail


rather than in general character.








Chapter XI





Industrial Organization Continued.


Production on a Large Scale





    1. The advantages of production on a large scale are best


shown in manufacture; under which head we may include all


businesses engaged in working up material into forms in which it


will be adapted for sale in distant markets. The characteristic


of manufacturing industries which makes them offer generally the


best illustrations of the advantages of production on a large


scale, is their power of choosing freely the locality in which


they will do their work. They are thus contrasted on the one hand


with agriculture and other extractive industries (mining,


quarrying, fishing, etc.), the geographical distribution of which


is determined by nature; and on the other hand with industries


that make or repair things to suit the special needs of


individual consumers, from whom they cannot be far removed, at


all events without great loss.(1*)


    The chief advantages of production on a large scale are


economy of skill, economy of machinery and economy of materials:


but the last of these is rapidly losing importance relatively to


the other two. It is true that an isolated workman often throws


away a number of small things which would have been collected and


turned to good account in a factory;(2*) but waste of this kind


can scarcely occur in a localized manufacture even if it is in


the hands of small men; and there is not very much of it in any


branch of industry in modern England, except agriculture and


domestic cooking. No doubt many of the most important advances of


recent years have been due to the utilizing of what had been a


waste product; but this has been generally due to a distinct


invention, either chemical or mechanical, the use of which has


been indeed promoted by minute subdivision of labour, but has not


been directly dependent on it.(3*)


    Again, it is true that when a hundred sets of furniture, or


of clothing, have to be cut out on exactly the same pattern, it


is worth while to spend great care on so planning the cutting out


of the boards or the cloth, that only a few small pieces are


wasted. But this is properly an economy of skill; one planning is


made to suffice for many tasks, and therefore can be done well


and carefully. We may pass then to the economy of machinery.





    2. In spite of the aid which subsidiary industries can give


to small manufactures, where many in the same branch of trade are


collected in one neighbourhood,(4*) they are still placed under a


great disadvantage by the growing variety and expensiveness of


machinery. For in a large establishment there are often many


expensive machines each made specially for one small use. Each of


them requires space in a good light, and thus stands for


something considerable in the rent and general expenses of the


factory; and independently of interest and the expense of keeping


it in repair, a heavy allowance must be made for depreciation in


consequence of its being probably improved upon before long.(5*)


A small manufacturer must therefore have many things done by hand


or by imperfect machinery, though he knows how to have them done


better and cheaper by special machinery, if only he could find


constant employment for it.


    But next, a small manufacturer may not always be acquainted


with the best machinery for his purpose. It is true that if the


industry in which he is engaged has been long established on a


large scale, his machinery will be well up to the mark, provided


he can afford to buy the best in the market. In agriculture and


the cotton industries, for instance, improvements in machinery


are devised almost exclusively by machine makers; and they are


accessible to all, at any rate on the payment of a royalty for


patent right. But this is not the case in industries that are as


yet in an early stage of development or are rapidly changing


their form; such as the chemical industries, the watchmaking


industry and some branches of the jute and silk manufactures; and


in a host of trades that are constantly springing up to supply


some new want or to work up some new material.


    In all such trades new machinery and new processes are for


the greater part devised by manufacturers for their own use. Each


new departure is an experiment which may fail; those which


succeed must pay for themselves and for the failure of others;


and though a small manufacturer may think he sees his way to an


improvement, he must reckon on having to work it out tentatively,


at considerable risk and expense and with much interruption to


his other work: and even if he should be able to perfect it, he


is not likely to be able to make the most of it. For instance, he


may have devised a new speciality, which would get a large sale


if it could be brought under general notice: but to do this would


perhaps cost many thousand pounds; and, if so, he will probably


have to turn his back on it. For it is almost impossible for him


to discharge, what Roscher calls a characteristic task of the


modern manufacturer, that of creating new wants by showing people


something which they had never thought of having before; but


which they want to have as soon as the notion s suggested to


them: in the pottery trade for example the small manufacturer


cannot afford even to make experiments with new patterns and


designs except in a very tentative way. His chance is better with


regard to an improvement in making things for which there is


already a good market. But even here he cannot get the full


benefit of his invention unless he patents it; and sells the


right to use it; or borrows some capital and extends his


business; or lastly changes the character of his business and


devotes his capital to that particular stage of the manufacture


to which his improvement applies. But after all such cases are


exceptional: the growth of machinery in variety and expensiveness


presses hard on the small manufacturer everywhere. It has already


driven him completely out of some trades and is fast driving him


out of others.(6*)


    There are however some trades in which the advantages which a


large factory derives from the economy of machinery almost vanish


as soon as a moderate size has been reached. For instance in


cotton spinning, and calico weaving, a comparatively small


factory will hold its own and give constant employment to the


best known machines for every process: so that a large factory is


only several parallel smaller factories under one roof; and


indeed some cotton-spinners, when enlarging their works, think it


best to add a weaving department. In such cases the large


business gains little or no economy in machinery; and even then


it generally saves something in building, particularly as regards


chimneys, and in the economy of steam power, and in the


management and repairs of engines and machinery. Large soft-goods


factories have carpenters' and mechanics' shops, which diminish


the cost of repairs, and prevent delays from accidents to the


plant.(7*)


    Akin to these last, there are a great many advantages which a


large factory, or indeed a large business of almost any kind,


nearly always has over a small one. A large business buys in


great quantities and therefore cheaply; it pays low freights and


saves on carriage in many ways, particularly if it has a railway


siding. It often sells in large quantities, and thus saves itself


trouble; and yet at the same time it gets a good price, because


it offers conveniences to the customer by having a large stock


from which he can select and at once fill up a varied order;


while its reputation gives him confidence. It can spend large


sums on advertising by commercial travellers and in other ways;


its agents give it trustworthy information on trade and personal


matters in distant places, and its own goods advertise one


another.


    The economies of highly organized buying and selling are


among the chief causes of the present tendency towards the fusion


of many businesses in the same industry or trade into single huge


aggregates; and also of trading federations of various kinds,


including German cartels and centralized co-operative


associations. They have also always promoted the concentration of


business risks in the hands of large capitalists who put out the


work to be done by smaller men.(8*)





    3. Next, with regard to the economy of skill. Everything that


has been said with regard to the advantages which a large


establishment has in being able to afford highly specialized


machinery applies equally with regard to highly specialized


skill. It can contrive to keep each of its employees constantly


engaged in the most difficult work of which he is capable, and


yet so to narrow the range of his work that he can attain that


facility and excellence which come from long-continued practice.


But enough has already been said on the advantage of division of


labour: and we may pass to an important though indirect advantage


which a manufacturer derives from having a great many men in his


employment.


    The large manufacturer has a much better chance than a small


one has, of getting hold of men with exceptional natural


abilities, to do the most difficult part of his work -- that on


which the reputation of his establishment chiefly depends. This


is occasionally important as regards mere handiwork in trades


which require much taste and originality, as for instance that of


a house decorator, and in those which require exceptionally fine


workmanship, as for instance that of a manufacturer of delicate


mechanism.(9*) But in most businesses its chief importance lies


in the facilities which it gives to the employer for the


selection of able and tried men, men whom he trusts and who trust


him, to be his foremen and heads of departments. We are thus


brought to the central problem of the modern organization of


industry, viz. that which relates to the advantages and


disadvantages of the subdivision of the work of business


management.





    4. The head of a large business can reserve all his strength


for the broadest and most fundamental problems of his trade: he


must indeed assure himself that his managers, clerks and foremen


are the right men for their work, and are doing their work well;


but beyond this he need not trouble himself much about details.


He can keep his mind fresh and clear for thinking out the most


difficult and vital problems of his business.. for studying the


broader movements of the markets, the yet undeveloped results of


current events at home and abroad; and for contriving how to


improve the organization of the internal and external relations


of his business.


    For much of this work the small employer has not the time if


he has the ability; he cannot take so broad a survey of his


trade, or look so far ahead; he must often be content to follow


the lead of others. And he must spend much of his time on work


that is below him; for if he is to succeed at all, his mind must


be in some respects of a high quality, and must have a good deal


of originating and organizing force; and yet he must do much


routine work.


    On the other hand the small employer has advantages of his


own. The master's eye is everywhere; there is no shirking by his


foremen or workmen, no divided responsibility, no sending


half-understood messages backwards and forwards from one


department to another. He saves much of the book-keeping, and


nearly all of the cumbrous system of checks that are necessary in


the business of a large firm; and the gain from this source is of


very great importance in trades which use the more valuable


metals and other expensive materials.


    And though he must always remain at a great disadvantage in


getting information and in making experiments, yet in this matter


the general course of progress is on his side. For external


economies are constantly growing in importance relatively to


internal in all matters of trade-knowledge: newspapers, and trade


and technical publications of all kinds are perpetually scouting


for him and bringing him much of the knowledge he wants-knowledge


which a little while ago would have been beyond the reach of


anyone who could not afford to have well-paid agents in many


distant I places. Again, it is to his interest also that the


secrecy of business is on the whole diminishing, and that the


most important improvements in method seldom remain secret for


long after they have passed from the experimental stage. It is to


his advantage that changes in manufacture depend less on mere


rules of thumb and more on broad developments of scientific


principle; and that many of these are made by students in the


pursuit of knowledge for its own sake, and are promptly published


in the general interest. Although therefore the small


manufacturer can seldom be in the front of the race of progress,


he need not be far from it, if he has the time and the ability


for availing himself of the modern facilities for obtaining


knowledge. But it is true that he must be exceptionally strong if


he can do this without neglecting the minor but necessary details


of the business.





    5. In agriculture and other trades in which a man gains no


very great new economies by increasing the scale of his


production, it often happens that a business remains of about the


same size for many years, if not for many generations. But it is


otherwise in trades in which a large business can command very


important advantages, which are beyond the reach of a small


business. A new man, working his way up in such a trade, has to


set his energy and flexibility, his industry and care for small


details, against the broader economies of his rivals with their


larger capital, their higher specialization of machinery and


labour, and their larger trade connection. If then he can double


his production, and sell at anything like his old rate, he will


have more than doubled his profits. This will raise his credit


with bankers and other shrewd lenders; and will enable him to


increase his business further, and to attain yet further


economies, and yet higher profits: and this again will increase


his business and so on. It seems at first that no point is marked


out at which he need stop. And it is true that, if, as his


business increased, his faculties adapted themselves to his


larger sphere, as they had done to his smaller; if he retained


his originality, and versatility and power of initiation, his


perseverance, his tact and his good luck for very many years


together; he might then gather into his hands the whole volume of


production in his branch of trade for his district. And if his


goods were not very difficult of transport, nor of marketing, he


might extend this district very wide, and attain something like a


limited monopoly; that is, of a monopoly limited by the


consideration that a very high price would bring rival producers


into the field.


    But long before this end is reached, his progress is likely


to be arrested by the decay, if not of his faculties, yet of his


liking for energetic work. The rise of his firm may be prolonged


if he can hand down his business to a successor almost as


energetic as himself.(10*) But the continued very rapid growth of


his firm requires the presence of two conditions which are seldom


combined in the same industry. There are many trades in which an


individual producer could secure much increased "internal"


economies by a great increase of his output; and there are many


in which he could market that output easily; yet there are few in


which he could do both. And this is not an accidental, but almost


a necessary result.


    For in most of those trades in which the economies of


production on a large scale are of first-rate importance,


marketing is difficult. There are, no doubt, important


exceptions. A producer may, for instance, obtain access to the


whole of a large market in the case of goods which are so simple


and uniform that they can be sold wholesale in vast quantities.


But, most goods of this kind are raw produce; and nearly all the


rest are plain and common, such as steel rails or calico; and


their production can be reduced to routine, for the very reason


that they are plain and common. Therefore in the industries which


produce them, no firm can hold its own at all unless equipped


with expensive appliances of nearly the latest type for its main


work; while subordinate operations can be performed by subsidiary


industries; and in short there remains no very great difference


between the economies available by a large and by a very large


firm; and the tendency of large firms to drive out small ones has


already gone so far as to exhaust most of the strength of those


forces by which it was originally promoted.


    But many commodities with regard to which the tendency to


increasing return acts strongly are, more or less, specialities:


some of them aim at creating a new want, or at meeting an old


want in a new way. Some of them are adapted to special tastes,


and can never have a very large market; and some have merits that


are not easily tested, and must win their way to general favour


slowly. In all such cases the sales of each business are limited,


more or less according to circumstances, to the particular market


which it has slowly and expensively acquired; and though the


production itself might be economically increased very fast, the


sale could not.


    Lastly, the very conditions of an industry which enable a new


firm to attain quickly command over new economies of production,


render that firm liable to be supplanted quickly by still younger


firms with yet newer methods. Especially where the powerful


economies of production on a large scale are associated with the


use of new appliances and new methods, a firm which has lost the


exceptional energy which enabled it to rise, is likely ere long


quickly to decay; and the full life of a large firm seldom lasts


very long.





    6. The advantages which a large business has over a small one


are conspicuous in manufacture, because, as we have noticed, it


has special facilities for concentrating a great deal of work in


a small area. But there is a strong tendency for large


establishments to drive out small ones in many other industries.


In particular the retail trade is being transformed, the small


shopkeeper is losing ground daily.


    Let us look at the advantages which a large retail shop or


store has in competing with its smaller neighbours. To begin


with, it can obviously buy on better terms, it can get its goods


carried more cheaply, and can offer a larger variety to meet the


taste of customers. Next, it has a great economy of skill: the


small shopkeeper, like the small manufacturer, must spend much of


his time in routine work that requires no judgment: whereas the


head of a large establishment, and even in some cases his chief


assistants, spend their whole time in using their judgment. Until


lately these advantages have been generally outweighed by the


greater facilities which the small shopkeeper has for bringing


his goods to the door of his customers; for humouring their


several tastes; and for knowing enough of them individually to be


able safely to lend them capital, in the form of selling them


goods on credit.


    But within recent years there have been many changes all


telling on the side of large establishments. The habit of buying


on credit is passing away; and the personal relations between


shopkeeper and customer are becoming more distant. The first


change is a great step forwards: the second is on some accounts


to be regretted, but not on all; for it is partly due to the fact


that the increase of true self-respect among the wealthier


classes is making them no longer care for the subservient


personal attentions they used to require. Again, the growing


value of time makes people less willing than they were to spend


several hours in shopping; they now often prefer to spend a few


minutes in writing out a long list of orders from a varied and


detailed price-list; and this they are enabled to do easily by


the growing facilities for ordering and receiving parcels by post


and in other ways. And when they do go shopping, tramcars and


local trains are often at hand to take them easily and cheaply to


the large central shops of a neighbouring town. All these changes


render it more difficult than it was for the small shopkeeper to


hold his own even in the provision trade, and others in which no


great variety of stock is required.


    But in many trades the ever-growing variety of commodities,


and those rapid changes of fashion which now extend their baneful


influence through almost every rank of society, weight the


balance even more heavily against the small dealer, for he cannot


keep a sufficient stock to offer much variety of choice, and if


he tries to follow any movement of fashion closely, a larger


proportion of his stock will be left stranded by the receding


tide than in the case of a large shopkeeper. Again, in some


branches of the clothing and furniture and other trades the


increasing cheapness of machine-made goods is leading people to


buy ready-made things from a large store instead of having them


made to order by some small maker and dealer in their


neighbourhood. Again, the large shopkeeper, not content with


receiving travellers from the manufacturers, makes tours either


himself or by his agent in the most important manufacturing


districts at home and abroad; and he thus often dispenses with


middlemen between him and the manufacturer. A tailor with


moderate capital shows his customers specimens of many hundreds


of the newest cloths, and perhaps orders by telegraph the


selected cloth to be sent by parcels' post. Again, ladies often


buy their materials direct from the manufacturer, and get them


made up by dressmakers who have scarcely any capital. Small


shopkeepers seem likely always to retain some hold of the minor


repairing trades: and they keep their own fairly well in the sale


of perishable food, especially to the working classes, partly in


consequence of their being able to sell goods on credit and to


collect small debts. In many trades however a firm with a large


capital prefers having many small shops to one large one. Buying,


and whatever production is desirable, is concentrated under a


central management; and exceptional demands are met from a


central reserve, so that each branch has large resources, without


the expense of keeping a large stock. The branch manager has


nothing to divert his attention from his customers; and, if an


active man, with direct interest in the success of his branch,


may prove himself a formidable rival to the small shopkeeper; as


has been shown in many trades connected with clothing and food.





    7. We may next consider those industries whose geographical


position is determined by the nature of their work.


    Country carriers and a few cabmen are almost the only


survivals of small industry in the carrying trade. Railways and


tramways are constantly increasing in size, and the capital


required to work them is increasing at an even greater rate. The


growing intricacy and variety of commerce is adding to the


advantages which a large fleet of ships under one management


derives from its power of delivering goods promptly, and without


breach of responsibility, in many different ports; and as regards


the vessels themselves time is on the side of large ships,


especially in the passenger trade.(11*) As a consequence the


arguments in favour of the State's undertaking business are


stronger in some branches of the carrying trade than in any


other, except the allied undertakings of carrying away refuse,


and bringing in water, gas, etc.(12*)


    The contest between large and small mines and quarries has


not so clearly marked a tendency. The history of the State


management of mines is full of very dark shadows; for the


business of mining depends too much on the probity of its


managers and their energy and judgment in matters of detail as


well as of general principle, to be well managed by State


officials: and for the same reason the small mine or quarry may


fairly be expected, other things being equal, to hold its own


against the large one. But in some cases the cost of deep shafts,


of machinery and of establishing means of communication, are too


great to be borne by any but a very large business.


    In agriculture there is not much division of labour, and


there is no production on a very large scale; for a so-called


"large farm" does not employ a tenth part of the labour which is


collected in a factory of moderate dimensions. This is partly due


to natural causes, to the changes of the seasons and to the


difficulty of concentrating a great deal of labour in any one


place; but it is partly also due to causes connected with


varieties of land tenure. And it will be best to postpone


discussion of all of them till we come to study demand and supply


in relation to land in the sixth Book.





NOTES:





1. "Manufacture" is a term which has long lost any connection


with its original use: and is now applied to those branches of


production where machine and not hand work is most prominent.


Roscher made the attempt to bring it back nearer to its old use


by applying it to domestic as opposed to factory industries: but


it is too late to do this now.





2. See Babbage's instance of the manufacture of horn. Economy of


Manufactures, ch. XXII.





3. Instances are the utilization of the waste from cotton, wool,


silk and other textile materials; and of the by-products in the


metallurgical industries, in the manufacture of soda and gas, and


in the American mineral oil and meat packing industries.





4. See the preceding chapter, section 3.





5. The average time which a machine will last before being


superseded is in many trades not more than fifteen years, while


in some it is ten years or even less. There is often a loss on


the use of a machine unless it earns every year twenty per cent.


on its cost; and when the operation performed by such a machine


costing ?00 adds only a hundredth part to the value of the


material that passes through it -- and this is not an extreme


case -- there will be a loss on its use unless it can be applied


in producing at least ?0,000 worth of goods annually.





6. In many businesses only a small percentage of improvements are


patented. They consist of many small steps, which it would not be


worth while to patent one at a time. Or their chief point lies in


noticing that a certain thing ought to be done; and to patent one


way of doing it, is only to set other people to work to find out


other ways of doing it against which the patent cannot guard. If


one patent is taken out, it is often necessary to "block" it, by


patenting other methods of arriving at the same result; the


patentee does not expect to use them himself, but he wants to


prevent others from using them. All this involves worry and loss


of time and money: and the large manufacturer prefers to keep his


improvement to himself and get what benefit he can by using it.


While if the small manufacturer takes out a patent, he is likely


to be harassed by infringements: and even though he may win "with


costs" the actions in which he tries to defend himself, he is


sure to be ruined by them if they are numerous. It is generally


in the public interest that an improvement should be published,


even though it is at the same time patented. But if it is


patented in England and not in other countries, as is often the


case, English manufacturers may not use it, even though they were


just on the point of finding it out for themselves before it was


patented; while foreign manufacturers learn all about it and can


use it freely.





7. It is a remarkable fact that cotton and some other textile


factories form an exception to the general rule that the capital


required per head of the workers is generally greater in a large


factory than in a small one. The reason is that in most other


businesses the large factory has many things done by expensive


machines which are done by hand in a small factory; so that while


the wages bill is less in proportion to the output in a large


factory than in a small one, the value of the machinery and the


factory space occupied by the machinery is much greater. But in


the simpler branches of the textile trades, small works have the


same machinery as large works have; and since small


steam-engines, etc. are proportionately more expensive than large


ones, they require a greater fixed capital in proportion to their


output than larger factories do; and they are likely to require a


floating capital also rather greater in proportion.





8. See below IV, xii, section 3.





9. Thus Boulton writing in 1770 when he had 700 or 800 persons


employed as metallic artists and workers in tortoiseshell,


stones, glass, and enamel, says: "I have trained up many, and am


training up more, plain country lads into good workmen; and


wherever I find indications of skill and ability, I encourage


them. I have likewise established correspondence with almost


every mercantile town in Europe, and am thus regularly supplied


with orders for the grosser articles in common demand, by which I


am enabled to employ such a number of hands as to provide me with


an ample choice of artists for the finer branches of work: and I


am thus encouraged to erect and employ a more extensive apparatus


than it would be prudent to employ for the production of the


finer articles only." Smiles, Life of Boulton, p. 128.





10. Means to this end and their practical limitations are


discussed in the latter half of the following chapter.





11. A ship's carrying power varies as the cube of her dimensions,


while the resistance offered by the water increases only a little


faster than the square of her dimensions; so that a large ship


requires less coal in proportion to its tonnage than a small one.


It also requires less labour, especially that of navigation:


while to passengers it offers greater safety and comfort, more


choice of company and better professional attendance. In short,


the small ship has no chance of competing with the large ship


between ports which large ships can easily enter, and between


which the traffic is sufficient to enable them to fill up


quickly.





12. It is characteristic of the great economic change of the last


hundred years that when the first railway bills were passed,


provision was made for allowing private individuals to run their


own conveyances on them, just as they do on a highway or a canal;


and now we find it difficult to imagine how people could have


expected, as they certainly did, that this plan would prove a


practicable one.








Chapter XII





Industrial Organization Continued.


Business Management





    1. Hitherto we have been considering the work of management


chiefly in regard to the operations of a manufacturing or other


business employing a good deal of manual labour. But we now have


to consider more carefully the variety of the functions which


business men discharge; the manner in which they are distributed


among the heads of a large business, and again between different


classes of business which co-operate in allied branches of


production and marketing. And incidentally we have to inquire how


it occurs that, though in manufacturing at least nearly every


individual business, so long as it is well managed, tends to


become stronger the larger it has grown; and though prim?facie


we might therefore expect to see large firms driving their


smaller rivals completely out of many branches of industry, yet


they do not in fact do so.


    "Business" is taken here broadly to include all provision for


the wants of others which is made in the expectation of payment


direct or indirect from those who are to be benefited. It is thus


contrasted with the provision for his wants which each one makes


for himself, and with those kindly services which are prompted by


friendship and family affection.


    The primitive handicraftsman managed his whole business for


himself; but since his customers were with few exceptions his


immediate neighbours, since he required very little capital,


since the plan of production was arranged for him by custom, and


since he had no labour to superintend outside of his own


household, these tasks did not involve any very great mental


strain. He was far from enjoying unbroken prosperity; war and


scarcity were constantly pressing on him and his neighbours,


hindering his work and stopping their demand for his wares. But


he was inclined to take good and evil fortune, like sunshine and


rain, as things beyond his control: his fingers worked on, but


his brain was seldom weary.


    Even in modern England we find now and then a village artisan


who adheres to primitive methods, and makes things on his own


account for sale to his neighbours; managing his own business and


undertaking all its risks. But such cases are rare: the most


striking instances of an adherence to old-fashioned methods of


business are supplied by the learned professions; for a physician


or a solicitor manages as a rule his own business and does all


its work. This plan is not without its disadvantages: much


valuable activity is wasted or turned to but slight account by


some professional men of first-rate ability, who have not the


special aptitude required for obtaining a business connection;


they would be better paid, would lead happier lives, and would do


more good service for the world if their work could be arranged


for them by some sort of a middleman. But yet on the whole things


are probably best as they are: there are sound reasons behind the


popular instinct which distrusts the intrusion of the middleman


in the supply of those services which require the highest and


most delicate mental qualities, and which can have their full


value only where there is complete personal confidence.


    English solicitors however act, if not as employers or


undertakers, yet as agents for hiring that branch of the legal


profession which ranks highest, and whose work involves the


hardest mental strain. Again, many of the best instructors of


youth sell their services, not directly to the consumer, but to


the governing body of a college or school, or to a head master,


who arranges for their purchase: the employer supplies to the


teacher a market for his labour; and is supposed to give to the


purchaser, who may not be a good judge himself, some sort of


guarantee as to the quality of the teaching supplied.


    Again, artists of every kind, however eminent, often find it


to their advantage to employ someone else to arrange for them


with customers; while those of less established repute are


sometimes dependent for their living on capitalist traders, who


are not themselves artists, but who understand how to sell


artistic work to the best advantage.





    2. But in the greater part of the business of the modern


world the task of so directing production that a given effort may


be most effective in supplying human wants has to be broken up


and given into the hands of a specialized body of employers, or


to use a more general term, of business men. They "adventure" or


"undertake" its risks; they bring together the capital and the


labour required for the work; they arrange or "engineer" its


general plan, and superintend its minor details. Looking at


business men from one point of view we may regard them as a


highly skilled industrial grade, from another as middlemen


intervening between the manual worker and the consumer.


    There are some kinds of business men who undertake great


risks, and exercise a large influence over the welfare both of


the producers and of the consumers of the wares in which they


deal, but who are not to any considerable extent direct employers


of labour. The extreme type of these is the dealer on the stock


exchange or the produce markets, whose daily purchases and sales


are of vast dimensions, and who yet has neither factory nor


warehouse, but at most an office with a few clerks in it. The


good and the evil effects of the action of speculators such as


these are however very complex; and we may give our attention at


present to those forms of business in which administration counts


for most and the subtler forms of speculation for least. Let us


then take some illustrations of the more common types of


business, and watch the relations in which the undertaking of


risks stands to the rest of the work of the business man.





    3. The building trade will serve our purpose well, partly


because it adheres in some respects to primitive methods of


business. Late in the Middle Ages it was quite common for a


private person to build a house for himself without the aid of a


master builder; and the habit is not even now altogether extinct.


A person who undertakes his own building must hire separately all


his workmen, he must watch them and check their demands for


payment; he must buy his materials from many quarters, and he


must hire, or dispense with the use of, expensive machinery. He


probably pays more than the current wages; but here others gain


what he loses. There is however great waste in the time he spends


in bargaining with the men and testing and directing their work


by his imperfect knowledge; and again in the time that he spends


in finding out what kinds and quantities he wants of different


materials, and where to get them best, and so on. This waste is


avoided by that division of labour which assigns to the


professional builder the task of superintending details, and to


the professional architect the task of drawing plans.


    The division of labour is often carried still further when


houses are built not at the expense of those who are to live in


them, but as a building speculation. When this is done on a large


scale, as for instance in opening out a new suburb, the stakes at


issue are so large as to offer an attractive field to powerful


capitalists with a very high order of general business ability,


but perhaps with not much technical knowledge of the building


trade. They rely on their own judgment for the decision as to


what are likely to be the coming relations of demand and supply


for different kinds of houses; but they entrust to others the


management of details. They employ architects and surveyors to


make plans in accordance with their general directions; and then


enter into contracts with professional builders for carrying them


out. But they themselves undertake the chief risks of the


business, and control its general direction.





     4. It is well known that this division of responsibility


prevailed in the woollen trade just before the beginning of the


era of large factories: the more speculative work and the broader


risks of buying and selling being taken over by the undertakers,


who were not themselves employers of labour; while the detailed


work of superintendence and the narrower risks of carrying out


definite contracts were handed over to small masters.(1*) This


plan is still extensively followed in some branches of the


textile trades, especially those in which the difficulty of


forecasting the future is very great. Manchester warehousemen


give themselves to studying the movements of fashion, the markets


for raw materials, the general state of trade, of the money


market and of politics, and all other causes that are likely to


influence the prices of different kinds of goods during the


coming season; and after employing, if necessary, skilled


designers to carry out their ideas (just as the building


speculator in the previous case employed architects), they give


out to manufacturers in different parts of the world contracts


for making the goods on which they have determined to risk their


capital.


    In the clothing trades especially we see a revival of what


has been called the "house industry," which prevailed long ago in


the textile industries; that is, the system in which large


undertakers give out work to be done in cottages and very small


workshops to persons who work alone or with the aid of some


members of their family, or who perhaps employ two or three hired


assistants.(2*) In remote villages in almost every county of


England agents of large undertakers come round to give out to the


cottagers partially prepared materials for goods of all sorts,


but especially clothes such as shirts and collars and gloves; and


take back with them the finished goods. It is however in the


great capital cities of the world, and in other large towns,


especially old towns, where there is a great deal of unskilled


and unorganized labour, with a somewhat low physique and morale,


that the system is most fully developed, especially in the


clothing trades, which employ two hundred thousand people in


London alone, and in the cheap furniture trades. There is a


continual contest between the factory and the domestic system,


now one gaining ground and now the other: for instance just at


present the growing use of sewing machines worked by steam power


is strengthening the position of the factories in the boot trade;


while factories and workshops are getting an increased hold of


the tailoring trade. On the other hand the hosiery trade is being


tempted back to the dwelling-house by recent improvements in hand


knitting machines; and it is possible that new methods of


distributing power by gas and petroleum and electric engines may


exercise a like influence on many other industries. Or there may


be a movement towards intermediate plans, similar to those which


are largely followed in the Sheffield trades. Many cutlery firms


for instance put out grinding and other parts of their work, at


piece-work prices, to working men who rent the steam power which


they require, either from the firm from whom they take their


contract or from someone else: these workmen sometimes employing


others to help them, sometimes working alone.


    Again, the foreign merchant very often has no ships of his


own, but gives his mind to studying the course of trade, and


undertakes himself its chief risks; while he gets his carrying


done for him by men who require more administrative ability, but


need not have the same power of forecasting the subtler movements


of trade; though it is true that as purchasers of ships they have


great and difficult trade risks of their own. Again, the broader


risks of publishing a book are borne by the publisher, perhaps in


company with the author; while the printer is the employer of


labour and supplies the expensive types and machinery required


for the business. And a somewhat similar plan is adopted in many


branches of the metal trades, and of those which supply


furniture, clothing, etc.


    Thus there are many ways in which those who undertake the


chief risks of buying and selling may avoid the trouble of


housing and superintending those who work for them. They all have


their advantages; and when the workers are men of strong


character, as at Sheffield, the results are on the whole not


unsatisfactory. But unfortunately it is often the weakest class


of workers, those with the least resource and the least


self-control who drift into work of this kind. The elasticity of


the system which recommends it to the undertaker, is really the


means of enabling him to exercise, if he chooses, an undesirable


pressure on those who do his work.


    For while the success of a factory depends in a great measure


on its having a set of operatives who adhere steadily to it, the


capitalist who gives out work to be done at home has an interest


in retaining a great many persons on his books; he is tempted to


give each of them a little employment occasionally and play them


off one against another; and this he can easily do because they


do not know one another, and cannot arrange concerted action.





    5. When the profits of business are under discussion they are


generally connected in people's minds with the employer of


labour: "the employer" is often taken as a term practically


coextensive with the receiver of business profits. But the


instances which we have just considered are sufficient to


illustrate the truth that the superintendence of labour is but


one side, and often not the most important side of business work;


and that the employer who undertakes the whole risks of his


business really performs two entirely distinct services on behalf


of the community, and requires a twofold ability.


    To return to a class of considerations already noticed (IV,


XI, sections 4 and 5), the manufacturer who makes goods not to


meet special orders but for the general market, must, in his


first role as merchant and organizer of production, have a


thorough knowledge of things in his own trade. He must have the


power of forecasting the broad movements of production and


consumption, of seeing where there is an opportunity for


supplying a new commodity that will meet a real want or improving


the plan of producing an old commodity. He must be able to judge


cautiously and undertake risks boldly; and he must of course


understand the materials and machinery used in his trade.


    But secondly in this role of employer he must be a natural


leader of men. He must have a power of first choosing his


assistants rightly and then trusting them fully; of interesting


them in the business and of getting them to trust him, so as to


bring out whatever enterprise and power of origination there is


in them; while he himself exercises a general control over


everything, and preserves order and unity in the main plan of the


business.


    The abilities required to make an ideal employer are so great


and so numerous that very few persons can exhibit them all in a


very high degree. Their relative importance however varies with


the nature of the industry and the size of the business; and


while one employer excels in one set of qualities, another excels


in another; scarcely any two owe their success to exactly the


same combination of advantages. Some men make their way by the


use of none but noble qualities, while others owe their


prosperity to qualities in which there is very little that is


really admirable except sagacity and strength of purpose.


    Such then being the general nature of the work of business


management, we have next to inquire what opportunities different


classes of people have of developing business ability; and, when


they have obtained that, what opportunities they have of getting


command over the capital required to give it scope. We may thus


come a little closer to the problem stated at the beginning of


the chapter, and examine the course of development of a business


firm during several consecutive generations. And this inquiry may


conveniently be combined with some examination of the different


forms of business management. Hitherto we have considered almost


exclusively that form in which the whole responsibility and


control rests in the hands of a single individual. But this form


is yielding ground to others in which the supreme authority is


distributed among several partners or even a great number of


shareholders. Private firms and joint-stock companies,


co-operative societies and public corporations are taking a


constantly increasing share in the management of business; and


one chief reason of this is that they offer an attractive field


to people who have good business abilities, but have not


inherited any great business opportunities.





    6. It is obvious that the son of a man already established in


business starts with very great advantages over others. He has


from his youth up special facilities for obtaining the knowledge


and developing the faculties that are required in the management


of his father's business: he learns quietly and almost


unconsciously about men and manners in his father's trade and in


those from which that trade buys and to which it sells; he gets


to know the relative importance and the real significance of the


various problems and anxieties which occupy his father's mind:


and he acquires a technical knowledge of the processes and the


machinery of the trade.(3*) Some of what he learns will be


applicable only to his father's trade; but the greater part will


be serviceable in any trade that is in any way allied with that;


while those general faculties of judgment and resource, of


enterprise and caution, of firmness and courtesy, which are


trained by association with those who control the larger issues


of any one trade, will go a long way towards fitting him for


managing almost any other trade. Further, the sons of successful


business men start with more material capital than almost anyone


else except those who by nurture and education are likely to be


disinclined for business and unfitted for it: and if they


continue their fathers' work, they have also the vantage ground


of established trade connections.


    It would therefore at first sight seem likely that business


men should constitute a sort of caste; dividing out among their


sons the chief posts of command, and founding hereditary


dynasties, which should rule certain branches of trade for many


generations together. But the actual state of things is very


different. For when a man has got together a great business, his


descendants often fail, in spite of their great advantages, to


develop the high abilities and the special turn of mind and


temperament required for carrying it on with equal success. He


himself was probably brought up by parents of strong earnest


character; and was educated by their personal influence and by


struggle with difficulties in early life. But his children, at


all events if they were born after he became rich, and in any


case his grandchildren, are perhaps left a good deal to the care


of domestic servants who are not of the same strong fibre as the


parents by whose influence he was educated. And while his highest


ambition was probably success in business, they are likely to be


at least equally anxious for social or academic distinction.(4*)


    For a time indeed all may go well. His sons find a firmly


established trade connection, and what is perhaps even more


important, a well-chosen staff of subordinates with a generous


interest in the business. By mere assiduity and caution, availing


themselves of the traditions of the firm, they may hold together


for a long time. But when a full generation has passed, when the


old traditions are no longer a safe guide, and when the bonds


that held together the old staff have been dissolved, then the


business almost invariably falls to pieces unless it is


practically handed over to the management of new men who have


meanwhile risen to partnership in the firm. But in most cases his


descendants arrive at this result by a shorter route. They prefer


an abundant income coming to them without effort on their part,


to one which though twice as large could be earned only by


incessant toil and anxiety; and they sell the business to private


persons or a joint-stock company; or they become sleeping


partners in it; that is sharing in its risks and in its profits,


but not taking part in its management: in either case the active


control over their capital falls chiefly into the hands of new


men.





    7. The oldest and simplest plan for renovating the energies


of a business is that of taking into partnership some of its


ablest employees. The autocratic owner and manager of a large


manufacturing or trading concern finds that, as years go on, he


has to delegate more and more responsibility to his chief


subordinates; partly because the work to be done is growing


heavier, and partly because his own strength is becoming less


than it was. He still exercises a supreme control, but much must


depend on their energy and probity: so, if his sons are not old


enough, or for any other reason are not ready to take part of the


burden off his shoulders, he decides to take one of his trusted


assistants into partnership: he thus lightens his own labours, at


the same time that he secures that the task of his life will be


carried on by those whose habits he has moulded, and for whom he


has perhaps acquired something like a fatherly affection.(5*)


    But there are now, and there always have been, private


partnerships on more equal terms, two or more people of about


equal wealth and ability combining their resources for a large


and difficult undertaking. In such cases there is often a


distinct partition of the work of management: in manufactures for


instance one partner will sometimes give himself almost


exclusively to the work of buying raw material and selling the


finished product, while the other is responsible for the


management of the factory: and in a trading establishment one


partner will control the wholesale and the other the retail


department. In these and other ways private partnership is


capable of adapting itself to a great variety of problems: it is


very strong and very elastic; it has played a great part in the


past, and it is full of vitality now.





    8. But from the end of the Middle Ages to the present time


there has been in some classes of trades a movement towards the


substitution of public joint-stock companies, the shares of which


can be sold to anybody in the open market, for private companies,


the shares in which are not transferable without the leave of all


concerned. The effect of this change has been to induce people,


many of whom having no special knowledge of trade, to give their


capital into the hands of others employed by them: and there has


thus arisen a new distribution of the various parts of the work


of business management.


    The ultimate undertakers of the risks incurred by a


joint-stock company are the shareholders; but as a rule they do


not take much active part in engineering the business and


controlling its general policy; and they take no part in


superintending its details. After the business has once got out


of the hands of its original promoters, the control of it is left


chiefly in the hands of Directors; who, if the company is a very


large one, probably own but a very small proportion of its


shares, while the greater part of them have not much technical


knowledge of the work to be done. They are not generally expected


to give their whole time to it; but they are supposed to bring


wide general knowledge and sound judgment to bear on the broader


problems of its policy; and at the same time to make sure that


the "Managers" of the company are doing their work


thoroughly.(6*) To the Managers and their assistants is left a


great part of the work of engineering the business, and the whole


of the work of superintending it: but they are not required to


bring any capital into it; and they are supposed to be promoted


from the lower ranks to the higher according to their zeal and


ability. Since the joint-stock companies in the United Kingdom do


a very great part of the business of all kinds that is done in


the country, they offer very large opportunities to men with


natural talents for business management, who have not inherited


any material capital, or any business connection.





    9. Joint-stock companies have great elasticity and can expand


themselves without limit when the work to which they have set


themselves offers a wide scope; and they are gaining ground in


nearly all directions. But they have one great source of weakness


in the absence of any adequate knowledge of the business on the


part of the shareholders who undertake its chief risks. It is


true that the head of a large private firm undertakes the chief


risks of the business, while he entrusts many of its details to


others; but his position is secured by his power of forming a


direct judgment as to whether his subordinates serve his


interests faithfully and discreetly. If those to whom he has


entrusted the buying or selling of goods for him take commissions


from those with whom they deal, he is in a position to discover


and punish the fraud. If they show favouritism and promote


incompetent relations or friends of their own, or if they


themselves become idle and shirk their work, or even if they do


not fulfil the promise of exceptional ability which induced him


to give them their first lift, he can discover what is going


wrong and set it right.


    But in all these matters the great body of the shareholders


of a joint-stock company are, save in a few exceptional


instances, almost powerless; though a few of the larger


shareholders often exert themselves to find out what is going on;


and are thus able to exercise an effective and wise control over


the general management of the business. It is a strong proof of


the marvellous growth in recent times of a spirit of honesty and


uprightness in commercial matters, that the leading officers of


great public companies yield as little as they do to the vast


temptations to fraud which lie in their way. If they showed an


eagerness to avail themselves of opportunities for wrong-doing at


all approaching that of which we read in the commercial history


of earlier civilization, their wrong uses of the trusts imposed


in them would have been on so great a scale as to prevent the


development of this democratic form of business. There is every


reason to hope that the progress of trade morality will continue,


aided in the future as it has been in the past, by a diminution


of trade secrecy and by increased publicity in every form; and


thus collective and democratic forms of business management may


be able to extend themselves safely in many directions in which


they have hitherto failed, and may far exceed the great services


they already render in opening a large career to those who have


no advantages of birth.


    The same may be said of the undertakings of Governments


imperial and local: they also may have a great future before


them, but up to the present time the tax-payer who undertakes the


ultimate risks has not generally succeeded in exercising an


efficient control over the businesses, and in securing officers


who will do their work with as much energy and enterprise as is


shown in private establishments.


    The problems of large joint-stock company administration, as


well as of Governmental business, involve however many complex


issues into which we cannot enter here. They are urgent, because


very large businesses have recently increased fast, though


perhaps not quite so fast as is commonly supposed. The change has


been brought about chiefly by the development of processes and


methods in manufacture and mining, in transport and banking,


which are beyond the reach of any, and by the increase in the


scope but very large capitals; and functions of markets, and in


the technical facilities for handling large masses of goods. The


democratic element in Governmental enterprise was at first almost


wholly vivifying: but experience shows creative ideas and


experiments in business technique, and in business organization,


to be very rare in Governmental undertakings, and not very common


in private enterprises which have drifted towards bureaucratic


methods as the result of their great age and large size. A new


danger is thus threatened by the narrowing of the field of


industry which is open to the vigorous initiative of smaller


businesses.


    Production on the largest scale of all is to be seen chiefly


in the United States, where giant businesses, with some touch of


monopoly, are commonly called "trusts." Some of these trusts have


grown from a single root. But most of them have been developed by


the amalgamation of many independent businesses; and a first step


towards this combination was generally an association, or


"cartel" to use a German term, of a rather loose kind.





    10. The system of cooperation aims at avoiding the evils of


these two methods of business management. In that ideal form of


co-operative society, for which many still fondly hope, but which


as yet has been scantily realized in practice, a part or the


whole of those shareholders who undertake the risks of the


business are themselves employed by it. The employees, whether


they contribute towards the material capital of the business or


not, have a share in its profits, and some power of voting at the


general meetings at which the broad lines of its policy are laid


down, and the officers appointed who are to carry that policy


into effect. They are thus the employers and masters of their own


managers and foremen; they have fairly good means of judging


whether the higher work of engineering the business is conducted


honestly and efficiently, and they have the best possible


opportunities for detecting any laxity or incompetence in its


detailed administration. And lastly they render unnecessary some


of the minor work of superintendence that is required in other


establishments; for their own pecuniary interests and the pride


they take in the success of their own business make each of them


averse to any shirking of work either by himself or by his


fellow-workmen.


    But unfortunately the system has very great difficulties of


its own. For human nature being what it is, the employees


themselves are not always the best possible masters of their own


foremen and managers; jealousies and frettings at reproof are apt


to act like sand, that has got mixed with the oil in the bearings


of a great and complex machinery. The hardest work of business


management is generally that which makes the least outward show;


those who work with their hands are apt to underrate the


intensity of the strain involved in the highest work of


engineering the business, and to grudge its being paid for at


anything like as high a rate as it could earn elsewhere. And in


fact the managers of a co-operative society seldom have the


alertness, the inventiveness and the ready versatility of the


ablest of those men who have been selected by the struggle for


survival, and who have been trained by the free and unfettered


responsibility of private business. Partly for these reasons the


co-operative system has seldom been carried out in its entirety.


and its partial application has not yet attained a conspicuous


success except in retailing commodities consumed by working men.


But within the last few years more hopeful signs have appeared of


the success of bon?fide productive associations, or


"co-partnerships."


    Those working men indeed whose tempers are strongly


individualistic, and whose minds are concentrated almost wholly


on their own affairs, will perhaps always find their quickest and


most congenial path to material success by commencing business as


small independent "undertakers," or by working their way upwards


in a private firm or a public company. But co-operation has a


special charm for those in whose tempers the social element is


stronger, and who desire not to separate themselves from their


old comrades, but to work among them as their leaders. Its


aspirations may in some respects be higher than its practice; but


it undoubtedly does rest in great measure on ethical motives. The


true co-operator combines a keen business intellect with a spirit


full of an earnest faith; and some co-operative societies have


been served excellently by men of great genius both mentally and


morally -- men who for the sake of the co-operative faith that is


in them, have worked with great ability and energy, and with


perfect uprightness, being all the time content with lower pay


than they could have got as business managers on their own


account or for a private firm. Men of this stamp are more common


among the officers of co-operative societies than in other


occupations; and though they are not very common even there, yet


it may be hoped that the diffusion of a better knowledge of the


true principles of co-operation, and the increase of general


education, are every day fitting a larger number of co-operators


for the complex problems of business management.


    Meanwhile many partial applications of the co-operative


principle are being tried under various conditions, each of which


presents some new aspect of business management. Thus under the


scheme of Profit-Sharing, a private firm while retaining the


unfettered management of its business, pays its employees the


full market rate of wages, whether by Time or Piece-work, and


agrees in addition to divide among them a certain share of any


profits that may be made above a fixed minimum; it being hoped


that the firm will find a material as well as a moral reward in


the diminution of friction, in the increased willingness of its


employees to go out of their way to do little things that may be


of great benefit comparatively to the firm, and lastly in


attracting to itself workers of more than average ability and


industry.(7*)


    Another partially co-operative scheme is that of some Oldham


cotton-mills: they are really joint-stock companies; but among


their shareholders are many working men who have a special


knowledge of the trade, though they often prefer not to be


employed in the mills of which they are part owners. And another


is that of the Productive establishments, owned by the main body


of co-operative stores, through their agents, the Co-operative


Wholesale Societies. In the Scotch Wholesale, but not in the


English, the workers, as such, have some share in the management


and in the profits of the works.


    At a later stage we shall have to study all those various


co-operative and semi-co-operative forms of business more in


detail, and to inquire into the causes of their success or


failure in different classes of business, wholesale and retail,


agricultural, manufacturing and trading. But we must not pursue


this inquiry further now. Enough has been said to show that the


world is only just beginning to be ready for the higher work of


the co-operative movement; and that its many different forms may


therefore be reasonably expected to attain a larger success in


the future than in the past; and to offer excellent opportunities


for working men to practise themselves in the work of business


management, to grow into the trust and confidence of others, and


gradually rise to posts in which their business abilities will


find scope.





    11. In speaking of the difficulty that a working man has in


rising to a post in which he can turn his business ability to


full account, the chief stress is commonly laid upon his want of


capital: but this is not always his chief difficulty. For


instance the co-operative distributive societies have accumulated


a vast capital, on which they find it difficult to get a good


rate of interest; and which they would be rejoiced to lend to any


set of working men who could show that they had the capacity for


dealing with difficult business problems. Co-operators who have


firstly a high order of business ability and probity, and


secondly the "personal capital" of a great reputation among their


fellows for these qualities, will have no difficulty in getting


command of enough material capital for a considerable


undertaking: the real difficulty is to convince a sufficient


number of those around them that they have these rare qualities.


And the case is not very different when an individual endeavours


to obtain from the ordinary sources the loan of the capital


required to start him in business.


    It is true that in almost every business there is a constant


increase in the amount of capital required to make a fair start;


but there is a much more rapid increase in the amount of capital


which is owned by people who do not want to use it themselves,


and are so eager to lend it out that they will accept a


constantly lower and lower rate of interest for it. Much of this


capital passes into the hands of bankers who promptly lend it to


anyone of whose business ability and honesty they are convinced.


To say nothing of the credit that can be got in many businesses


from those who supply the requisite raw material or stock in


trade, the opportunities for direct borrowing are now so great


that a moderate increase in the amount of capital required for a


start in business is no very serious obstacle in the way of a


person who has once got over the initial difficulty of earning a


reputation for being likely to use it well.


    But perhaps a greater though less conspicuous hindrance to


the rise of the working man is the growing complexity of


business. The head of a business has now to think of many things


about which he never used to trouble himself in earlier days; and


these are just the kind of difficulties for which the training of


the workshop affords the least preparation. Against this must be


set the rapid improvement of the education of the working man not


only at school, but what is more important, in after life by


newspapers, and from the work of co-operative societies and


trades-unions, and in other ways.


    About three-fourths of the whole population of England belong


to the wage-earning classes; and at all events when they are well


fed, properly housed and educated, they have their fair share of


that nervous strength which is the raw material of business


ability. Without going out of their way they are all consciously


or unconsciously competitors for posts of business command. The


ordinary workman if he shows ability generally becomes a foreman,


from that he may rise to be a manager, and to be taken into


partnership with his employer. Or having saved a little of his


own he may start one of those small shops which still can hold


their own in a working man's quarter, stock it chiefly on credit,


and let his wife attend to it by day, while he gives his evenings


to it. In these or in other ways he may increase his capital till


he can start a small workshop, or factory. Once having made a


good beginning he will find the banks eager to give him generous


credit. He must have time; and since he is not likely to start in


business till after middle age he must have a long as well as a


strong life; but if he has this and has also "patience, genius


and good fortune" he is pretty sure to command a goodly capital


before he dies.(8*) In a factory those who work with their hands


have better opportunities of rising to posts of command than the


book-keepers and many others to whom social tradition has


assigned a higher place. But in trading concerns it is otherwise;


what manual work is done in them has as a rule no educating


character, while the experience of the office is better adapted


for preparing a man to manage a commercial than a manufacturing


business.


    There is then on the whole a broad movement from below


upwards. Perhaps not so many as formerly rise at once from the


position of working men to that of employers: but there are more


who get on sufficiently far to give their sons a good chance of


attaining to the highest posts. The complete rise is not so very


often accomplished in one generation; it is more often spread


over two; but the total volume of the movement upwards is


probably greater than it has ever been. And perhaps it is better


for society as a whole that the rise should be distributed over


two generations. The workmen who at the beginning of the last


century rose in such large numbers to become employers were


seldom fit for posts of command: they were too often harsh and


tyrannical; they lost their self-control, and were neither truly


noble nor truly happy; while their children were often haughty,


extravagant, and self-indulgent, squandering their wealth on low


and vulgar amusements, having the worst faults of the older


aristocracy without their virtues. The foreman or superintendent


who has still to obey as well as to command, but who is rising


and sees his children likely to rise further, is in some ways


more to be envied than the small master. His success is less


conspicuous, but his work is often higher and more important for


the world, while his character is more gentle and refined and not


less strong. His children are well-trained; and if they get


wealth, they are likely to make a fairly good use of it.


    It must however be admitted that the rapid extension of vast


businesses, and especially of joint-stock companies in many


branches of industry, is tending to make the able and thrifty


workman, with high ambitions for his sons, seek to put them to


office work. There they are in danger of losing the physical


vigour and the force of character which attaches to constructive


work with the hands, and to become commonplace members of the


lower middle classes. But, if they can keep their force


unimpaired, they are likely to become leaders in the world,


though not generally in their father's industry; and therefore


without the benefit of specially appropriate traditions and


aptitude.





    12. When a man of great ability is once at the head of an


independent business, whatever be the route by which he has got


there, he will with moderate good fortune soon be able to show


such evidence of his power of turning capital to good account as


to enable him to borrow in one way or another almost any amount


that he may need. Making good profits he adds to his own capital,


and this extra capital of his own is a material security for


further borrowings; while the fact that he has made it himself


tends to make lenders less careful to insist on a full security


for their loans. Of course fortune tells for much in business: a


very able man may find things going against him; the fact that he


is losing money may diminish his power of borrowing. If he is


working partly on borrowed capital, it may even make those who


have lent it refuse to renew their loans, and may thus cause him


to succumb to what would have been but a passing misfortune, if


he had been using no capital but his own:(9*) and in fighting his


way upwards he may have a chequered life full of great anxieties,


and even misfortunes. But he can show his ability in misfortune


as well as in success: human nature is sanguine; and it is


notorious that men are abundantly willing to lend to those who


have passed through commercial disaster without loss to their


business reputation. Thus, in spite of vicissitudes, the able


business man generally finds that in the long run the capital at


his command grows in proportion to his ability.


    Meanwhile, as we have seen, he, who with small ability is in


command of a large capital, speedily loses it: he may perhaps be


one who could and would have managed a small business with


credit, and left it stronger than he had found it: but if he has


not the genius for dealing with great problems, the larger it is


the more speedily will he break it up. For as a rule a large


business can be kept going only by transactions which, after


allowing for ordinary risks, leave but a very small percentage of


gain. A small profit on a large turn-over quickly made, will


yield a rich income to able men: and in those businesses which


are of such a nature as to give scope to very large capitals,


competition generally cuts the rate of profits on the turn-over


very fine. A village trader may make five per cent. less profits


on his turn-over than his abler rival, and yet be able to hold


his head above water. But in those large manufacturing and


trading businesses in which there is a quick return and a


straightforward routine, the whole profits on the turn-over are


often so very small that a person who falls behind his rivals by


even a small percentage loses a large sum at every turn-over;


while in those large businesses which are difficult and do not


rely on routine, and which afford high profits on the turn-over


to really able management, there are no profits at all to be got


by anyone who attempts the task with only ordinary ability.


    These two sets of forces, the one increasing the capital at


the command of able men, and the other destroying the capital


that is in the hands of weaker men, bring about the result that


there is a far more close correspondence between the ability of


business men and the size of the businesses which they own than


at first sight would appear probable. And when to this fact we


add all the many routes, which we have already discussed, by


which a man of great natural business ability can work his way up


high in some private firm or public company, we may conclude that


wherever there is work on a large scale to be done in such a


country as England, the ability and the capital required for it


are pretty sure to be speedily forthcoming.


    Further, just as industrial skill and ability are getting


every day to depend more and more on the broad faculties of


judgment, promptness, resource, carefulness and steadfastness of


purpose -- faculties which are not specialized to any one trade,


but which are more or less useful in all -- so it is with regard


to business ability. In fact business ability consists more of


these non-specialized faculties than do industrial skill and


ability in the lower grades: and the higher the grade of business


ability the more various are its applications.


    Since then business ability in command of capital moves with


great ease horizontally from a trade which is overcrowded to one


which offers good openings for it: and since it moves with great


ease vertically, the abler men rising to the higher posts in


their own trade, we see, even at this early stage of our inquiry,


some good reasons for believing that in modern England the supply


of business ability in command of capital accommodates itself, as


a general rule, to the demand for it; and thus has a fairly


defined supply price.


    Finally, we may regard this supply price of business ability


in command of capital as composed of three elements. The first is


the supply price of capital; the second is the supply price of


business ability and energy; and the third is the supply price of


that organization by which the appropriate business ability and


the requisite capital are brought together. We have called the


price of the first of these three elements interest; we may call


the price of the second taken by itself net earnings of


management, and that of the second and third, taken together,


gross earnings of management.





NOTES:





1. Compare Appendix A, section 13.





2. German economists call this "factory like" (fabrikmässig)


house industry, as distinguished from the "national" house


industry, which uses the intervals of other work (especially the


winter interruptions of agriculture) for subsidiary work in


making textile and other goods. (See Schönberg on Gewerbe in his


Handbuch.) Domestic workers of this last class were common all


over Europe in the Middle Ages but are now becoming rare except


in the mountains and in eastern Europe. They are not always well


advised in their choice of work; and much of what they make could


be made better with far less labour in factories, so that it


cannot be sold profitably in the open market: but for the most


part they make for their own or their neighbours' use, and thus


save the profits of a series of middlemen. Compare Survival of


Domestic Industries by Gonner in the Economic Journal, Vol. II.





3. We have already noticed how almost the only perfect


apprenticeships of modern times are those of the sons of


manufacturers, who practise almost every important operation that


is carried on in the works sufficiently to be able in after years


to enter into the difficulties of all their employees and form a


fair judgment on their work.





4. Until lately there has ever been in England a kind of


antagonism between academic studies and business. This is now


being diminished by the broadening of the spirit of our great


universities, and by the growth of colleges in our chief business


centres. The sons of business men when sent to the universities


do not learn to despise their fathers' trades as often as they


used to do even a generation ago. Many of them indeed are drawn


away from business by the desire to extend the boundaries of


knowledge. But the higher forms of mental activity, those which


are constructive and not merely critical, tend to promote a just


appreciation of the nobility of business work rightly done.





5. Much of the happiest romance of life, much that is most


pleasant to dwell upon in the social history of England from the


Middle Ages up to our own day is connected with the story of


private partnerships of this class. Many a youth has been


stimulated to a brave career by the influence of ballads and


tales which narrate the difficulties and the ultimate triumph of


the faithful apprentice, who has at length been taken into


partnership, perhaps on marrying his employer's daughter. There


are no influences on national character more far-reaching than


those which thus give shape to the aims of aspiring youth.





6. Bagehot delighted to argue (see for instance English


Constitution, ch. VII) that a Cabinet Minister often derives some


advantage from his want of technical knowledge of the business of


his Department. For he can get information on matters of detail


from the Permanent Secretary and other officials who are under


his authority; and, while he is not likely to set his judgment


against theirs on matters where their knowledge gives them the


advantage, his unprejudiced common sense may well overrule the


traditions of officialism in broad questions of public policy:


and in like manner the interests of a company may possibly


sometimes be most advanced by those Directors who have the least


technical knowledge of the details of its business.





7. Compare Schloss, Methods of Industrial Remuneration; and


Gilman, A Dividend to Labour.





8. The Germans say that success in business requires "Geld,


Geduld, Genie und Glück." The chances that a working man has of


rising vary somewhat with the nature of the work, being greatest


in those trades in which a careful attention to details counts


for most, and a wide knowledge, whether of science or of the


world movements of speculation, counts for least. Thus for


instance "thrift and the knowledge of practical details" are the


most important elements of success in the ordinary work of the


pottery trade; and in consequence most of those who have done


well in it "have risen from the bench like Josiah Wedgwood" (see


G. Wedgwood's evidence before the Commission on Technical


Education); and a similar statement might be made about many of


the Sheffield trades. But some of the working classes develop a


great faculty for taking speculative risks; and if the knowledge


of facts by which successful speculation must be guided, comes


within their reach, they will often push their way through


competitors who have started above them. Some of the most


successful wholesale dealers in perishable commodities such as


fish and fruit have begun life as market porters.





9. The danger of not being able to renew his borrowings just at


the time when he wants them most, puts him at a disadvantage


relatively to those who use only their own capital, much greater


than is represented by the mere interest on his borrowings: and,


when we come to that part of the doctrine of distribution which


deals with earnings of management, we shall find that, for this


among other reasons, profits are something more than interest in


addition to net earnings of management, i.e. those earnings which


are properly to be ascribed to the abilities of business men.








Chapter XIII





Conclusion.


Correlation of the Tendencies to Increasing and to Diminishing


Return





    1. At the beginning of this Book we saw how the extra return


of raw produce which nature affords to an increased application


of capital and labour, other things being equal, tends in the


long run to diminish. In the remainder of the Book and especially


in the last four chapters we have looked at the other side of the


shield, and seen how man's power of productive work increases


with the volume of the work that he does. Considering first the


causes that govern the supply of labour, we saw how every


increase in the physical, mental and moral vigour of a people


makes them more likely, other things being equal, to rear to


adult age a large number of vigorous children. Turning next to


the growth of wealth, we observed how every increase of wealth


tends in many ways to make a greater increase more easy than


before. And lastly we saw how every increase of wealth and every


increase in the numbers and intelligence of the people increased


the facilities for a highly developed industrial organization,


which in its turn adds much to the collective efficiency of


capital and labour.


    Looking more closely at the economies arising from an


increase in the scale of production of any kind of goods, we


found that they fell into two classes -- those dependent on the


general development of the industry, and those dependent on the


resources of the individual houses of business engaged in it and


the efficiency of their management; that is, into external and


internal economies.


    We saw how these latter economies are liable to constant


fluctuations so far as any particular house is concerned. An able


man, assisted perhaps by some strokes of good fortune, gets a


firm footing in the trade, he works hard and lives sparely, his


own capital grows fast, and the credit that enables him to borrow


more capital grows still faster; he collects around him


subordinates of more than ordinary zeal and ability; as his


business increases they rise with him, they trust him and he


trusts them, each of them devotes himself with energy to just


that work for which he is specially fitted, so that no high


ability is wasted on easy work, and no difficult work is


entrusted to unskilful hands. Corresponding to this steadily


increasing economy of skill, the growth of his business brings


with it similar economies of specialized machines and plant of


all kinds; every improved process is quickly adopted and made the


basis of further improvements; success brings credit and credit


brings success; credit and success help to retain old customers


and to bring new ones; the increase of his trade gives him great


advantages in buying; his goods advertise one another, and thus


diminish his difficulty in finding a vent for them. The increase


in the scale of his business increases rapidly the advantages


which he has over his competitors, and lowers the price at which


he can afford to sell. This process may go on as long as his


energy and enterprise, his inventive and organizing power retain


their full strength and freshness, and so long as the risks which


are inseparable from business do not cause him exceptional


losses; and if it could endure for a hundred years, he and one or


two others like him would divide between them the whole of that


branch of industry in which he is engaged. The large scale of


their production would put great economies within their reach;


and provided they competed to their utmost with one another, the


public would derive the chief benefit of these economies, and the


price of the commodity would fall very low.


    But here we may read a lesson from the young trees of the


forest as they struggle upwards through the benumbing shade of


their older rivals. Many succumb on the way, and a few only


survive; those few become stronger with every year, they get a


larger share of light and air with every increase of their


height, and at last in their turn they tower above their


neighbours, and seem as though they would grow on for ever, and


for ever become stronger as they grow. But they do not. One tree


will last longer in full vigour and attain a greater size than


another; but sooner or later age tells on them all. Though the


taller ones have a better access to light and air than their


rivals, they gradually lose vitality; and one after another they


give place to others, which, though of less material strength,


have on their side the vigour of youth.


    And as with the growth of trees, so was it with the growth of


businesses as a general rule before the great recent development


of vast joint-stock companies, which often stagnate, but do not


readily die. Now that rule is far from universal, but it still


holds in many industries and trades. Nature still presses on the


private business by limiting the length of the life of its


original founders, and by limiting even more narrowly that part


of their lives in which their faculties retain full vigour. And


so, after a while, the guidance of the business falls into the


hands of people with less energy and less creative genius, if not


with less active interest in its prosperity. If it is turned into


a joint-stock company, it may retain the advantages of division


of labour, of specialized skill and machinery: it may even


increase them by a further increase of its capital; and under


favourable conditions it may secure a permanent and prominent


place in the work of production. But it is likely to have lost so


much of its elasticity and progressive force, that the advantages


are no longer exclusively on its side in its competition with


younger and smaller rivals.


    When therefore we are considering the broad results which the


growth of wealth and population exert on the economies of


production, the general character of our conclusions is not very


much affected by the facts that many of these economies depend


directly on the size of the individual establishments engaged in


the production, and that in almost every trade there is a


constant rise and fall of large businesses, at any one moment


some firms being in the ascending phase and others in the


descending. For in times of average prosperity decay in one


direction is sure to be more than balanced by growth in another.


    Meanwhile an increase in the aggregate scale of production of


course increases those economies, which do not directly depend on


the size of individual houses of business. The most important of


these results from the growth of correlated branches of industry


which mutually assist one another, perhaps being concentrated in


the same localities, but anyhow availing themselves of the modern


facilities for communication offered by steam transport, by the


telegraph and by the printing-press. The economies arising from


such sources as this, which are accessible to any branch of


production, do not depend exclusively upon its own growth: but


yet they are sure to grow rapidly and steadily with that growth;


and they are sure to dwindle in some, though not in all respects,


if it decays.





    2. These results will be of great importance when we come to


discuss the causes which govern the supply price of a commodity.


We shall have to analyse carefully the normal cost of producing a


commodity, relatively to a given aggregate volume of production;


and for this purpose we shall have to study the expenses of a


representative producer for that aggregate volume. On the one


hand we shall not want to select some new producer just


struggling into business, who works under many disadvantages, and


has to be content for a time with little or no profits, but who


is satisfied with the fact that he is establishing a connection


and taking the first steps towards building up a successful


business; nor on the other hand shall we want to take a firm


which by exceptionally long-sustained ability and good fortune


has got together a vast business, and huge well-ordered workshops


that give it a superiority over almost all its rivals. But our


representative firm must be one which has had a fairly long life,


and fair success, which is managed with normal ability, and which


has normal access to the economies, external and internal, which


belong to that aggregate volume of production; account being


taken of the class of goods produced, the conditions of marketing


them and the economic environment generally.


    Thus a representative firm is in a sense an average firm. But


there are many ways in which the term "average" might be


interpreted in connection with a business. And a Representative


firm is that particular sort of average firm, at which we need to


look in order to see how far the economies, internal and


external, of production on a large scale have extended generally


in the industry and country in question. We cannot see this by


looking at one or two firms taken at random: but we can see it


fairly well by selecting, after a broad survey, a firm, whether


in private or joint-stock management (or better still, more than


one), that represents, to the best of our judgment, this


particular average.


    The general argument of the present Book shows that an


increase in the aggregate volume of production of anything will


generally increase the size, and therefore the internal economies


possessed by such a representative firm; that it will always


increase the external economies to which the firm has access; and


thus will enable it to manufacture at a less proportionate cost


of labour and sacrifice than before.


    In other words, we say broadly that while the part which


nature plays in production shows a tendency to diminishing


return, the part which man plays shows a tendency to increasing


return. The law of increasing return may be worded thus: -- An


increase of labour and capital leads generally to improved


organization, which increases the efficiency of the work of


labour and capital.


    Therefore in those industries which are not engaged in


raising raw produce an increase of labour and capital generally


gives a return increased more than in proportion; and further


this improved organization tends to diminish or even override any


increased resistance which nature may offer to raising increased


amounts of raw produce. If the actions of the laws of increasing


and diminishing return are balanced we have the law of constant


return, and an increased produce is obtained by labour and


sacrifice increased just in proportion.


    For the two tendencies towards increasing and diminishing


return press constantly against one another. In the production of


wheat and wool, for instance, the latter tendency has almost


exclusive sway in an old country, which cannot import freely. In


turning the wheat into flour, or the wool into blankets, an


increase in the aggregate volume of production brings some new


economies, but not many; for the trades of grinding wheat and


making blankets are already on so great a scale that any new


economies that they may attain are more likely to be the result


of new inventions than of improved organization. In a country


however in which the blanket trade is but slightly developed,


these latter may be important; and then it may happen that an


increase in the aggregate production of blankets diminishes the


proportionate difficulty of manufacturing by just as much as it


increases that of raising the raw material. In that case the


actions of the laws of diminishing and of increasing return would


just neutralize one another; and blankets would conform to the


law of constant return. But in most of the more delicate branches


of manufacturing, where the cost of raw material counts for


little, and in most of the modern transport industries the law of


increasing return acts almost unopposed.(1*)


    Increasing Return is a relation between a quantity of effort


and sacrifice on the one hand, and a quantity of product on the


other. The quantities cannot be taken out exactly, because


changing methods of production call for machinery, and for


unskilled and skilled labour of new kinds and in new proportions.


But, taking a broad view, we may perhaps say vaguely that the


output of a certain amount of labour and capital in an industry


has increased by perhaps a quarter or a third in the last twenty


years. To measure outlay and output in terms of money is a


tempting, but a dangerous resource: for a comparison of money


outlay with money returns is apt to slide into an estimate of the


rate of profit on capital.(2*)





    3. We may now sum up provisionally the relations of


industrial expansion to social wellbeing. A rapid growth of


population has often been accompanied by unhealthy and enervating


habits of life in overcrowded towns. And sometimes it has started


badly, outrunning the material resources of the people, causing


them with imperfect appliances to make excessive demands on the


soil; and so to call forth the stern action of the law of


diminishing return as regards raw produce, without having the


power of minimizing its effects. Having thus begun with poverty,


an increase in numbers may go on to its too frequent consequences


in that weakness of character which unfits a people for


developing a highly organized industry.


    These are serious perils: but yet it remains true that the


collective efficiency of a people with a given average of


individual strength and energy may increase more than in


proportion to their numbers. If they can for a time escape from


the pressure of the law of diminishing return by importing food


and other raw produce on easy terms; if their wealth is not


consumed in great wars, and increases at least as fast as their


numbers; and if they avoid habits of life that would enfeeble


them; then every increase in their numbers is likely for the time


to be accompanied by a more than proportionate increase in their


power of obtaining material goods. For it enables them to secure


the many various economies of specialized skill and specialized


machinery, of localized industries and production on a large


scale: it enables them to have increased facilities of


communication of all kinds; while the very closeness of their


neighbourhood diminishes the expense of time and effort involved


in every sort of traffic between them, and gives them new


opportunities of getting social enjoyments and the comforts and


luxuries of culture in every form. No doubt deduction must be


made for the growing difficulty of finding solitude and quiet and


even fresh air: but there is in most cases some balance of


good.(3*)


    Taking account of the fact that an increasing density of


population generally brings with it access to new social


enjoyments we may give a rather broader scope to this statement


and say: -- An increase of population accompanied by an equal


increase in the material sources of enjoyment and aids to


production is likely to lead to a more than proportionate


increase in the aggregate income of enjoyment of all kinds;


provided firstly, an adequate supply of raw produce can be


obtained without great difficulty, and secondly there is no such


overcrowding as causes physical and moral vigour to be impaired


by the want of fresh air and light and of healthy and joyous


recreation for the young.


    The accumulated wealth of civilized countries is at present


growing faster than the population: and though it may be true


that the wealth per head would increase somewhat faster if the


population did not increase quite so fast; yet as a matter of


fact an increase of population is likely to continue to be


accompanied by a more than proportionate increase of the material


aids to production: and in England at the present time, with easy


access to abundant foreign supplies of raw material, an increase


of population is accompanied by a more than proportionate


increase of the means of satisfying human wants other than the


need for light, fresh air, etc. Much of this increase is however


attributable not to the increase of industrial efficiency but to


the increase of wealth by which it is accompanied: and therefore


it does not necessarily benefit those who have no share in that


wealth. And further, England's foreign supplies of raw produce


may at any time be checked by changes in the trade regulations of


other countries, and may be almost cut off by a great war while


the naval and military expenditure which would be necessary to


make the country fairly secure against this last risk, would


appreciably diminish the benefits that she derives from the


action of the law of increasing return.





NOTES:





1. In an article on "The Variation of Productive Forces" in the


Quarterly Journal of Economics 1902, Professor Bullock suggests


that the term "Economy of Organization" should be substituted for


Increasing Return. He shows clearly that the forces which make


for Increasing Return are not of the same order as those that


make for Diminishing Return: and there are undoubtedly cases in


which it is better to emphasize this difference by describing


causes rather than results, and contrasting Economy of


Organization with the Inelasticity of Nature's response to


intensive cultivation.





2. There is no general rule that industries which yield


increasing returns show also rising profits. No doubt a vigorous


firm, which increases its scale of operations and obtains


important (internal) economies which are peculiar to it, will


show an increasing return and a rising rate of profit; because


its increasing output will not materially affect the price of its


produce. But profits tend to be low, as we shall see below (VI,


VIII, sections 1, 2), in such industries as plain weaving,


because their vast scale has enabled organization in production


and marketing to be carried so far as to be almost dominated by


routine.





3. The Englishman Mill bursts into unwonted enthusiasm when


speaking (Political Economy, Book IV, ch. VI, section 2) of the


pleasures of wandering alone in beautiful scenery: and many


American writers give fervid descriptions of the growing richness


of human life as the backwoodsman finds neighbours settling


around him, as the backwoods settlement develops into a village,


the village into a town, and the town into a vast city. (See for


instance Carey's Principles of Social Science and Henry George's


Progress and Poverty.)





End