




                                Book III

                                   1



    Now that we have stated the magnitudes, the properties, and the

relative differences of the other internal organs, it remains for us

to treat of the organs that contribute to generation. These organs

in the female are in all cases internal; in the male they present

numerous diversities.

    In the blooded animals some males are altogether devoid of

testicles, and some have the organ but situated internally; and of

those males that have the organ internally situated, some have it

close to the loin in the neighbourhood of the kidney and others

close to the belly. Other males have the organ situated externally. In

the case of these last, the penis is in some cases attached to the

belly, whilst in others it is loosely suspended, as is the case also

with the testicles; and, in the cases where the penis is attached to

the belly, the attachment varies accordingly as the animal is

emprosthuretic or opisthuretic.

    No fish is furnished with testicles, nor any other creature

that has gills, nor any serpent whatever: nor, in short, any animal

devoid of feet, save such only as are viviparous within themselves.

Birds are furnished with testicles, but these are internally situated,

close to the loin. The case is similar with oviparous quadrupeds, such

as the lizard, the tortoise and the crocodile; and among the

viviparous animals this peculiarity is found in the hedgehog. Others

among those creatures that have the organ internally situated have

it close to the belly, as is the case with the dolphin amongst animals

devoid of feet, and with the elephant among viviparous quadrupeds.

In other cases these organs are externally conspicuous.

    We have already alluded to the diversities observed in the

attachment of these organs to the belly and the adjacent region; in

other words, we have stated that in some cases the testicles are

tightly fastened back, as in the pig and its allies, and that in

others they are freely suspended, as in man.

    Fishes, then, are devoid of testicles, as has been stated, and

serpents also. They are furnished, however, with two ducts connected

with the midriff and running on to either side of the backbone,

coalescing into a single duct above the outlet of the residuum, and by

'above' the outlet I mean the region near to the spine. These ducts in

the rutting season get filled with the genital fluid, and, if the

ducts be squeezed, the sperm oozes out white in colour. As to the

differences observed in male fishes of diverse species, the reader

should consult my treatise on Anatomy, and the subject will be

hereafter more fully discussed when we describe the specific character

in each case.

    The males of oviparous animals, whether biped or quadruped, are

in all cases furnished with testicles close to the loin underneath the

midriff. With some animals the organ is whitish, in others somewhat of

a sallow hue; in all cases it is entirely enveloped with minute and

delicate veins. From each of the two testicles extends a duct, and, as

in the case of fishes, the two ducts coalesce into one above the

outlet of the residuum. This constitutes the penis, which organ in the

case of small ovipara is inconspicuous; but in the case of the

larger ovipara, as in the goose and the like, the organ becomes

quite visible just after copulation.

    The ducts in the case of fishes and in biped and quadruped

ovipara are attached to the loin under the stomach and the gut, in

betwixt them and the great vein, from which ducts or blood-vessels

extend, one to each of the two testicles. And just as with fishes

the male sperm is found in the seminal ducts, and the ducts become

plainly visible at the rutting season and in some instances become

invisible after the season is passed, so also is it with the testicles

of birds; before the breeding season the organ is small in some

birds and quite invisible in others, but during the season the organ

in all cases is greatly enlarged. This phenomenon is remarkably

illustrated in the ring-dove and the partridge, so much so that some

people are actually of opinion that these birds are devoid of the

organ in the winter-time.

    Of male animals that have their testicles placed frontwards, some

have them inside, close to the belly, as the dolphin; some have them

outside, exposed to view, close to the lower extremity of the belly.

These animals resemble one another thus far in respect to this

organ; but they differ from one another in this fact, that some of

them have their testicles situated separately by themselves, while

others, which have the organ situated externally, have them

enveloped in what is termed the scrotum.

    Again, in all viviparous animals furnished with feet the

following properties are observed in the testicles themselves. From

the aorta there extend vein-like ducts to the head of each of the

testicles, and another two from the kidneys; these two from the

kidneys are supplied with blood, while the two from the aorta are

devoid of it. From the head of the testicle alongside of the

testicle itself is a duct, thicker and more sinewy than the other just

alluded to-a duct that bends back again at the end of the testicle

to its head; and from the head of each of the two testicles the two

ducts extend until they coalesce in front at the penis. The duct

that bends back again and that which is in contact with the testicle

are enveloped in one and the same membrane, so that, until you draw

aside the membrane, they present all the appearance of being a

single undifferentiated duct. Further, the duct in contact with the

testicle has its moist content qualified by blood, but to a

comparatively less extent than in the case of the ducts higher up

which are connected with the aorta; in the ducts that bend back

towards the tube of the penis, the liquid is white-coloured. There

also runs a duct from the bladder, opening into the upper part of

the canal, around which lies, sheathwise, what is called the 'penis'.

    All these descriptive particulars may be regarded by the light of

the accompanying diagram; wherein the letter A marks the

starting-point of the ducts that extend from the aorta; the letters KK

mark the heads of the testicles and the ducts descending thereunto;

the ducts extending from these along the testicles are marked MM; the

ducts turning back, in which is the white fluid, are marked BB; the

penis D; the bladder E; and the testicles XX.

    (By the way, when the testicles are cut off or removed, the ducts

draw upwards by contraction. Moreover, when male animals are young,

their owner sometimes destroys the organ in them by attrition;

sometimes they castrate them at a later period. And I may here add,

that a bull has been known to serve a cow immediately after

castration, and actually to impregnate her.)

    So much then for the properties of testicles in male animals.

    In female animals furnished with a womb, the womb is not in all

cases the same in form or endowed with the same properties, but both

in the vivipara and the ovipara great diversities present

themselves. In all creatures that have the womb close to the genitals,

the womb is two-horned, and one horn lies to the right-hand side and

the other to the left; its commencement, however, is single, and so is

the orifice, resembling in the case of the most numerous and largest

animals a tube composed of much flesh and gristle. Of these parts

one is termed the hystera or delphys, whence is derived the word

adelphos, and the other part, the tube or orifice, is termed metra. In

all biped or quadruped vivipara the womb is in all cases below the

midriff, as in man, the dog, the pig, the horse, and the ox; the

same is the case also in all horned animals. At the extremity of the

so-called ceratia, or horns, the wombs of most animals have a twist or

convolution.

    In the case of those ovipara that lay eggs externally, the wombs

are not in all cases similarly situated. Thus the wombs of birds are

close to the midriff, and the wombs of fishes down below, just like

the wombs of biped and quadruped vivipara, only that, in the case of

the fish, the wombs are delicately formed, membranous, and

elongated; so much so that in extremely small fish, each of the two

bifurcated parts looks like a single egg, and those fishes whose egg

is described as crumbling would appear to have inside them a pair of

eggs, whereas in reality each of the two sides consists not of one but

of many eggs, and this accounts for their breaking up into so many

particles.

    The womb of birds has the lower and tubular portion fleshy and

firm, and the part close to the midriff membranous and exceedingly

thin and fine: so thin and fine that the eggs might seem to be outside

the womb altogether. In the larger birds the membrane is more

distinctly visible, and, if inflated through the tube, lifts and

swells out; in the smaller birds all these parts are more indistinct.

    The properties of the womb are similar in oviparous quadrupeds, as

the tortoise, the lizard, the frog and the like; for the tube below is

single and fleshy, and the cleft portion with the eggs is at the top

close to the midriff. With animals devoid of feet that are

internally oviparous and viviparous externally, as is the case with

the dogfish and the other so-called Selachians (and by this title we

designate such creatures destitute of feet and furnished with gills as

are viviparous), with these animals the womb is bifurcate, and

beginning down below it extends as far as the midriff, as in the

case of birds. There is also a narrow part between the two horns

running up as far as the midriff, and the eggs are engendered here and

above at the origin of the midriff; afterwards they pass into the

wider space and turn from eggs into young animals. However, the

differences in respect to the wombs of these fishes as compared with

others of their own species or with fishes in general, would be more

satisfactorily studied in their various forms in specimens under

dissection.

    The members of the serpent genus also present divergencies either

when compared with the above-mentioned creatures or with one

another. Serpents as a rule are oviparous, the viper being the only

viviparous member of the genus. The viper is, previously to external

parturition, oviparous internally; and owing to this perculiarity

the properties of the womb in the viper are similar to those of the

womb in the selachians. The womb of the serpent is long, in keeping

with the body, and starting below from a single duct extends

continuously on both sides of the spine, so as to give the

impression of thus being a separate duct on each side of the spine,

until it reaches the midriff, where the eggs are engendered in a

row; and these eggs are laid not one by one, but all strung

together. (And all animals that are viviparous both internally and

externally have the womb situated above the stomach, and all the

ovipara underneath, near to the loin. Animals that are viviparous

externally and internally oviparous present an intermediate

arrangement; for the underneath portion of the womb, in which the eggs

are, is placed near to the loin, but the part about the orifice is

above the gut.)

    Further, there is the following diversity observable in wombs as

compared with one another: namely that the females of horned

nonambidental animals are furnished with cotyledons in the womb when

they are pregnant, and such is the case, among ambidentals, with the

hare, the mouse, and the bat; whereas all other animals that are

ambidental, viviparous, and furnished with feet, have the womb quite

smooth, and in their case the attachment of the embryo is to the

womb itself and not to any cotyledon inside it.

    The parts, then, in animals that are not homogeneous with

themselves and uniform in their texture, both parts external and parts

internal, have the properties above assigned to them.






                                   2



    In sanguineous animals the homogeneous or uniform part most

universally found is the blood, and its habitat the vein; next in

degree of universality, their analogues, lymph and fibre, and, that

which chiefly constitutes the frame of animals, flesh and whatsoever

in the several parts is analogous to flesh; then bone, and parts

that are analogous to bone, as fish-bone and gristle; and then, again,

skin, membrane, sinew, hair, nails, and whatever corresponds to these;

and, furthermore, fat, suet, and the excretions: and the excretions

are dung, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.

    Now, as the nature of blood and the nature of the veins have

all the appearance of being primitive, we must discuss their

properties first of all, and all the more as some previous writers

have treated them very unsatisfactorily. And the cause of the

ignorance thus manifested is the extreme difficulty experienced in the

way of observation. For in the dead bodies of animals the nature of

the chief veins is undiscoverable, owing to the fact that they

collapse at once when the blood leaves them; for the blood pours out

of them in a stream, like liquid out of a vessel, since there is no

blood separately situated by itself, except a little in the heart, but

it is all lodged in the veins. In living animals it is impossible to

inspect these parts, for of their very nature they are situated inside

the body and out of sight. For this reason anatomists who have carried

on their investigations on dead bodies in the dissecting room have

failed to discover the chief roots of the veins, while those who

have narrowly inspected bodies of living men reduced to extreme

attenuation have arrived at conclusions regarding the origin of the

veins from the manifestations visible externally. Of these

investigators, Syennesis, the physician of Cyprus, writes as follows:-

    'The big veins run thus:-from the navel across the loins, along

the back, past the lung, in under the breasts; one from right to left,

and the other from left to right; that from the left, through the

liver to the kidney and the testicle, that from the right, to the

spleen and kidney and testicle, and from thence to the penis.'

Diogenes of Apollonia writes thus:-

    'The veins in man are as follows:-There are two veins

pre-eminent in magnitude. These extend through the belly along the

backbone, one to right, one to left; either one to the leg on its

own side, and upwards to the head, past the collar bones, through

the throat. From these, veins extend all over the body, from that on

the right hand to the right side and from that on the left hand to the

left side; the most important ones, two in number, to the heart in the

region of the backbone; other two a little higher up through the chest

in underneath the armpit, each to the hand on its side: of these

two, one being termed the vein splenitis, and the other the vein

hepatitis. Each of the pair splits at its extremity; the one

branches in the direction of the thumb and the other in the

direction of the palm; and from these run off a number of minute veins

branching off to the fingers and to all parts of the hand. Other

veins, more minute, extend from the main veins; from that on the right

towards the liver, from that on the left towards the spleen and the

kidneys. The veins that run to the legs split at the juncture of the

legs with the trunk and extend right down the thigh. The largest of

these goes down the thigh at the back of it, and can be discerned

and traced as a big one; the second one runs inside the thigh, not

quite as big as the one just mentioned. After this they pass on

along the knee to the shin and the foot (as the upper veins were

described as passing towards the hands), and arrive at the sole of the

foot, and from thence continue to the toes. Moreover, many delicate

veins separate off from the great veins towards the stomach and

towards the ribs.

    'The veins that run through the throat to the head can be

discerned and traced in the neck as large ones; and from each one of

the two, where it terminates, there branch off a number of veins to

the head; some from the right side towards the left, and some from the

left side towards the right; and the two veins terminate near to

each of the two ears. There is another pair of veins in the neck

running along the big vein on either side, slightly less in size

than the pair just spoken of, and with these the greater part of the

veins in the head are connected. This other pair runs through the

throat inside; and from either one of the two there extend veins in

underneath the shoulder blade and towards the hands; and these

appear alongside the veins splenitis and hepatitis as another pair

of veins smaller in size. When there is a pain near the surface of the

body, the physician lances these two latter veins; but when the pain

is within and in the region of the stomach he lances the veins

splenitis and hepatitis. And from these, other veins depart to run

below the breasts.

    'There is also another pair running on each side through the

spinal marrow to the testicles, thin and delicate. There is,

further, a pair running a little underneath the cuticle through the

flesh to the kidneys, and these with men terminate at the testicle,

and with women at the womb. These veins are termed the spermatic

veins. The veins that leave the stomach are comparatively broad just

as they leave; but they become gradually thinner, until they change

over from right to left and from left to right.

    'Blood is thickest when it is imbibed by the fleshy parts; when

it is transmitted to the organs above-mentioned, it becomes thin,

warm, and frothy.'

                                   3



    Such are the accounts given by Syennesis and Diogenes. Polybus

writes to the following effect:-

    'There are four pairs of veins. The first extends from the back of

the head, through the neck on the outside, past the backbone on either

side, until it reaches the loins and passes on to the legs, after

which it goes on through the shins to the outer side of the ankles and

on to the feet. And it is on this account that surgeons, for pains

in the back and loin, bleed in the ham and in the outer side of the

ankle. Another pair of veins runs from the head, past ears, through

the neck; which veins are termed the jugular veins. This pair goes

on inside along the backbone, past the muscles of the loins, on to the

testicles, and onwards to the thighs, and through the inside of the

hams and through the shins down to the inside of the ankles and to the

feet; and for this reason, surgeons, for pains in the muscles of the

loins and in the testicles, bleed on the hams and the inner side of

the ankles. The third pair extends from the temples, through the neck,

in underneath the shoulder-blades, into the lung; those from right

to left going in underneath the breast and on to the spleen and the

kidney; those from left to right running from the lung in underneath

the breast and into the liver and the kidney; and both terminate in

the fundament. The fourth pair extend from the front part of the

head and the eyes in underneath the neck and the collar-bones; from

thence they stretch on through the upper part of the upper arms to the

elbows and then through the fore-arms on to the wrists and the

jointings of the fingers, and also through the lower part of the

upper-arms to the armpits, and so on, keeping above the ribs, until

one of the pair reaches the spleen and the other reaches the liver;

and after this they both pass over the stomach and terminate at the

penis.'

    The above quotations sum up pretty well the statements of all

previous writers. Furthermore, there are some writers on Natural

History who have not ventured to lay down the law in such precise

terms as regards the veins, but who all alike agree in assigning the

head and the brain as the starting-point of the veins. And in this

opinion they are mistaken.

    The investigation of such a subject, as has been remarked, is one

fraught with difficulties; but, if any one be keenly interested in the

matter, his best plan will be to allow his animals to starve to

emaciation, then to strangle them on a sudden, and thereupon to

prosecute his investigations.

    We now proceed to give particulars regarding the properties and

functions of the veins. There are two blood-vessels in the thorax by

the backbone, and lying to its inner side; and of these two the larger

one is situated to the front, and the lesser one is to the rear of it;

and the larger is situated rather to the right hand side of the

body, and the lesser one to the left; and by some this vein is

termed the 'aorta', from the fact that even in dead bodies part of

it is observed to be full of air. These blood-vessels have their

origins in the heart, for they traverse the other viscera, in whatever

direction they happen to run, without in any way losing their

distinctive characteristic as blood-vessels, whereas the heart is as

it were a part of them (and that too more in respect to the

frontward and larger one of the two), owing to the fact that these two

veins are above and below, with the heart lying midway.

    The heart in all animals has cavities inside it. In the case of

the smaller animals even the largest of the chambers is scarcely

discernible; the second larger is scarcely discernible in animals of

medium size; but in the largest animals all three chambers are

distinctly seen. In the heart then (with its pointed end directed

frontwards, as has been observed) the largest of the three chambers is

on the right-hand side and highest up; the least one is on the

left-hand side; and the medium-sized one lies in betwixt the other

two; and the largest one of the three chambers is a great deal

larger than either of the two others. All three, however, are

connected with passages leading in the direction of the lung, but

all these communications are indistinctly discernible by reason of

their minuteness, except one.

    The great blood-vessel, then, is attached to the biggest of the

three chambers, the one that lies uppermost and on the right-hand

side; it then extends right through the chamber, coming out as

blood-vessel again; just as though the cavity of the heart were a part

of the vessel, in which the blood broadens its channel as a river that

widens out in a lake. The aorta is attached to the middle chamber;

only, by the way, it is connected with it by much narrower pipe.

    The great blood-vessel then passes through the heart (and runs

from the heart into the aorta). The great vessel looks as though

made of membrane or skin, while the aorta is narrower than it, and

is very sinewy; and as it stretches away to the head and to the

lower parts it becomes exceedingly narrow and sinewy.

    First of all, then, upwards from the heart there stretches a

part of the great blood-vessel towards the lung and the attachment

of the aorta, a part consisting of a large undivided vessel. But there

split off from it two parts; one towards the lung and the other

towards the backbone and the last vertebra of the neck.

    The vessel, then, that extends to the lung, as the lung itself

is duplicate, divides at first into two; and then extends along by

every pipe and every perforation, greater along the greater ones,

lesser along the less, so continuously that it is impossible to

discern a single part wherein there is not perforation and vein; for

the extremities are indistinguishable from their minuteness, and in

point of fact the whole lung appears to be filled with blood.

    The branches of the blood-vessels lie above the tubes that

extend from the windpipe. And that vessel which extends to the

vertebra of the neck and the backbone, stretches back again along

the backbone; as Homer represents in the lines:-



          (Antilochus, as Thoon turned him round),

          Transpierc'd his back with a dishonest wound;

          The hollow vein that to the neck extends,

          Along the chine, the eager javelin rends.



    From this vessel there extend small blood-vessels at each rib

and each vertebra; and at the vertebra above the kidneys the vessel

bifurcates. And in the above way the parts branch off from the great

blood-vessel.

    But up above all these, from that part which is connected with the

heart, the entire vein branches off in two directions. For its

branches extend to the sides and to the collarbones, and then pass on,

in men through the armpits to the arms, in quadrupeds to the forelegs,

in birds to the wings, and in fishes to the upper or pectoral fins.

(See diagram.) The trunks of these veins, where they first branch

off, are called the 'jugular' veins; and, where they branch off to

the neck the great vein run alongside the windpipe; and,

occasionally, if these veins are pressed externally, men, though not

actually choked, become insensible, shut their eyes, and fall flat on

the ground. Extending in the way described and keeping the windpipe

in betwixt them, they pass on until they reach the ears at the

junction of the lower jaw with the skull. Hence again they branch off

into four veins, of which one bends back and descends through the

neck and the shoulder, and meets the previous branching off of the

vein at the bend of the arm, while the rest of it terminates at the

hand and fingers. (See diagram.)

    Each vein of the other pair stretches from the region of the ear

to the brain, and branches off in a number of fine and delicate

veins into the so-called meninx, or membrane, which surrounds the

brain. The brain itself in all animals is destitute of blood, and no

vein, great or small, holds its course therein. But of the remaining

veins that branch off from the last mentioned vein some envelop the

head, others close their courses in the organs of sense and at the

roots of the teeth in veins exceedingly fine and minute.

                                   4



    And in like manner the parts of the lesser one of the two chief

blood-vessels, designated the aorta, branch off, accompanying the

branches from the big vein; only that, in regard to the aorta, the

passages are less in size, and the branches very considerably less

than are those of the great vein. So much for the veins as observed in

the regions above the heart.

    The part of the great vein that lies underneath the heart

extends, freely suspended, right through the midriff, and is united

both to the aorta and the backbone by slack membranous communications.

From it one vein, short and wide, extends through the liver, and

from it a number of minute veins branch off into the liver and

disappear. From the vein that passes through the liver two branches

separate off, of which one terminates in the diaphragm or so-called

midriff, and the other runs up again through the armpit into the right

arm and unites with the other veins at the inside of the bend of the

arm; and it is in consequence of this local connexion that, when the

surgeon opens this vein in the forearm, the patient is relieved of

certain pains in the liver; and from the left-hand side of it there

extends a short but thick vein to the spleen and the little veins

branching off it disappear in that organ. Another part branches off

from the left-hand side of the great vein, and ascends, by a course

similar to the course recently described, into the left arm; only that

the ascending vein in the one case is the vein that traverses the

liver, while in this case it is distinct from the vein that runs

into the spleen. Again, other veins branch off from the big vein;

one to the omentum, and another to the pancreas, from which vein run a

number of veins through the mesentery. All these veins coalesce in a

single large vein, along the entire gut and stomach to the oesophagus;

about these parts there is a great ramification of branch veins.

    As far as the kidneys, each of the two remaining undivided, the

aorta and the big vein extend; and here they get more closely attached

to the backbone, and branch off, each of the two, into a A shape,

and the big vein gets to the rear of the aorta. But the chief

attachment of the aorta to the backbone takes place in the region of

the heart; and the attachment is effected by means of minute and

sinewy vessels. The aorta, just as it draws off from the heart, is a

tube of considerable volume, but, as it advances in its course, it

gets narrower and more sinewy. And from the aorta there extend veins

to the mesentery just like the veins that extend thither from the

big vein, only that the branches in the case of the aorta are

considerably less in magnitude; they are, indeed, narrow and

fibrillar, and they end in delicate hollow fibre-like veinlets.

    There is no vessel that runs from the aorta into the liver or

the spleen.

    From each of the two great blood-vessels there extend branches

to each of the two flanks, and both branches fasten on to the bone.

Vessels also extend to the kidneys from the big vein and the aorta;

only that they do not open into the cavity of the organ, but their

ramifications penetrate into its substance. From the aorta run two

other ducts to the bladder, firm and continuous; and there are other

ducts from the hollow of the kidneys, in no way communicating with the

big vein. From the centre of each of the two kidneys springs a

hollow sinewy vein, running along the backbone right through the

loins; by and by each of the two veins first disappears in its own

flank, and soon afterwards reappears stretching in the direction of

the flank. The extremities of these attach to the bladder, and also in

the male to the penis and in the female to the womb. From the big vein

no vein extends to the womb, but the organ is connected with the aorta

by veins numerous and closely packed.

    Furthermore, from the aorta and the great vein at the points of

divarication there branch off other veins. Some of these run to the

groins-large hollow veins-and then pass on down through the legs and

terminate in the feet and toes. And, again, another set run through

the groins and the thighs cross-garter fashion, from right to left and

from left to right, and unite in the hams with the other veins.

    In the above description we have thrown light upon the course of

the veins and their points of departure.

    In all sanguineous animals the case stands as here set forth in

regard to the points of departure and the courses of the chief

veins. But the description does not hold equally good for the entire

vein-system in all these animals. For, in point of fact, the organs

are not identically situated in them all; and, what is more, some

animals are furnished with organs of which other animals are

destitute. At the same time, while the description so far holds

good, the proof of its accuracy is not equally easy in all cases,

but is easiest in the case of animals of considerable magnitude and

supplied abundantly with blood. For in little animals and those

scantily supplied with blood, either from natural and inherent

causes or from a prevalence of fat in the body, thorough accuracy in

investigation is not equally attainable; for in the latter of these

creatures the passages get clogged, like water-channels choked with

slush; and the others have a few minute fibres to serve instead of

veins. But in all cases the big vein is plainly discernible, even in

creatures of insignificant size.

                                   5



    The sinews of animals have the following properties. For these

also the point of origin is the heart; for the heart has sinews within

itself in the largest of its three chambers, and the aorta is a

sinew-like vein; in fact, at its extremity it is actually a sinew, for

it is there no longer hollow, and is stretched like the sinews where

they terminate at the jointings of the bones. Be it remembered,

however, that the sinews do not proceed in unbroken sequence from

one point of origin, as do the blood-vessels.

    For the veins have the shape of the entire body, like a sketch

of a mannikin; in such a way that the whole frame seems to be filled

up with little veins in attenuated subjects-for the space occupied

by flesh in fat individuals is filled with little veins in thin

ones-whereas the sinews are distributed about the joints and the

flexures of the bones. Now, if the sinews were derived in unbroken

sequence from a common point of departure, this continuity would be

discernible in attenuated specimens.

    In the ham, or the part of the frame brought into full play in the

effort of leaping, is an important system of sinews; and another

sinew, a double one, is that called 'the tendon', and others are those

brought into play when a great effort of physical strength is

required; that is to say, the epitonos or back-stay and the

shoulder-sinews. Other sinews, devoid of specific designation, are

situated in the region of the flexures of the bones; for all the bones

that are attached to one another are bound together by sinews, and a

great quantity of sinews are placed in the neighbourhood of all the

bones. Only, by the way, in the head there is no sinew; but the head

is held together by the sutures of the bones.

    Sinew is fissile lengthwise, but crosswise it is not easily

broken, but admits of a considerable amount of hard tension. In

connexion with sinews a liquid mucus is developed, white and

glutinous, and the organ, in fact, is sustained by it and appears to

be substantially composed of it. Now, vein may be submitted to the

actual cautery, but sinew, when submitted to such action, shrivels

up altogether; and, if sinews be cut asunder, the severed parts will

not again cohere. A feeling of numbness is incidental only to parts of

the frame where sinew is situated.

    There is a very extensive system of sinews connected severally

with the feet, the hands, the ribs, the shoulder-blades, the neck, and

the arms.

    All animals supplied with blood are furnished with sinews; but

in the case of animals that have no flexures to their limbs, but

are, in fact, destitute of either feet or hands, the sinews are fine

and inconspicuous; and so, as might have been anticipated, the

sinews in the fish are chiefly discernible in connexion with the fin.

                                   6



    The ines (or fibrous connective tissue) are a something

intermediate between sinew and vein. Some of them are supplied with

fluid, the lymph; and they pass from sinew to vein and from vein to

sinew. There is another kind of ines or fibre that is found in

blood, but not in the blood of all animals alike. If this fibre be

left in the blood, the blood will coagulate; if it be removed or

extracted, the blood is found to be incapable of coagulation. While,

however, this fibrous matter is found in the blood of the great

majority of animals, it is not found in all. For instance, we fail

to find it in the blood of the deer, the roe, the antelope, and some

other animals; and, owing to this deficiency of the fibrous tissue,

the blood of these animals does not coagulate to the extent observed

in the blood of other animals. The blood of the deer coagulates to

about the same extent as that of the hare: that is to the blood in

either case coagulates, but not into a stiff or jelly-like

substance, like the blood of ordinary animals, but only into a flaccid

consistency like that of milk which is not subjected to the action

of rennet. The blood of the antelope admits of a firmer consistency in

coagulation; for in this respect it resembles, or only comes a

little short of, the blood of sheep. Such are the properties of

vein, sinew, and fibrous tissue.

                                   7



    The bones in animals are all connected with one single bone, and

are interconnected, like the veins, in one unbroken sequence; and

there is no instance of a bone standing apart by itself. In all

animals furnished with bones, the spine or backbone is the point of

origin for the entire osseous system. The spine is composed of

vertebrae, and it extends from the head down to the loins. The

vertebrae are all perforated, and, above, the bony portion of the head

is connected with the topmost vertebrae, and is designated the

'skull'. And the serrated lines on the skull are termed 'sutures'.

    The skull is not formed alike in all animals. In some animals

the skull consists of one single undivided bone, as in the case of the

dog; in others it is composite in structure, as in man; and in the

human species the suture is circular in the female, while in the

male it is made up of three separate sutures, uniting above in

three-corner fashion; and instances have been known of a man's skull

being devoid of suture altogether. The skull is composed not of four

bones, but of six; two of these are in the region of the ears, small

in comparison with the other four. From the skull extend the jaws,

constituted of bone. (Animals in general move the lower jaw; the river

crocodile is the only animal that moves the upper one.) In the jaws is

the tooth-system; and the teeth are constituted of bone, and are

half-way perforated; and the bone in question is the only kind of bone

which it is found impossible to grave with a graving tool.

    On the upper part of the course of the backbone are the

collar-bones and the ribs. The chest rests on ribs; and these ribs

meet together, whereas the others do not; for no animal has bone in

the region of the stomach. Then come the shoulder-bones, or

blade-bones, and the arm-bones connected with these, and the bones

in the hands connected with the bones of the arms. With animals that

have forelegs, the osseous system of the foreleg resembles that of the

arm in man.

    Below the level of the backbone, after the haunch-bone, comes

the hip-socket; then the leg-bones, those in the thighs and those in

the shins, which are termed colenes or limb-bones, a part of which

is the ankle, while a part of the same is the so-called 'plectrum'

in those creatures that have an ankle; and connected with these

bones are the bones in the feet.

    Now, with all animals that are supplied with blood and furnished

with feet, and are at the same time viviparous, the bones do not

differ greatly one from another, but only in the way of relative

hardness, softness, or magnitude. A further difference, by the way, is

that in one and the same animal certain bones are supplied with

marrow, while others are destitute of it. Some animals might on casual

observation appear to have no marrow whatsoever in their bones: as

is the case with the lion, owing to his having marrow only in small

amount, poor and thin, and in very few bones; for marrow is found in

his thigh and armbones. The bones of the lion are exceptionally

hard; so hard, in fact, that if they are rubbed hard against one

another they emit sparks like flint-stones. The dolphin has bones, and

not fish-spine.

    Of the other animals supplied with blood, some differ but

little, as is the case with birds; others have systems analogous, as

fishes; for viviparous fishes, such as the cartilaginous species,

are gristle-spined, while the ovipara have a spine which corresponds

to the backbone in quadrupeds. This exceptional property has been

observed in fishes, that in some of them there are found delicate

spines scattered here and there throughout the fleshy parts. The

serpent is similarly constructed to the fish; in other words, his

backbone is spinous. With oviparous quadrupeds, the skeleton of the

larger ones is more or less osseous; of the smaller ones, more or less

spinous. But all sanguineous animals have a backbone of either one

kind or other: that is, composed either of bone or of spine.

    The other portions of the skeleton are found in some animals and


not found in others, but the presence or the absence of this and

that part carries with it, as a matter of course, the presence or

the absence of the bones or the spines corresponding to this or that

part. For animals that are destitute of arms and legs cannot be

furnished with limb-bones: and in like manner with animals that have

the same parts, but yet have them unlike in form; for in these animals

the corresponding bones differ from one another in the way of relative

excess or relative defect, or in the way of analogy taking the place

of identity. So much for the osseous or spinous systems in animals.

                                   8



    Gristle is of the same nature as bone, but differs from it in

the way of relative excess or relative defect. And just like bone,

cartilage also, if cut, does not grow again. In terrestrial viviparous

sanguinea the gristle formations are unperforated, and there is no

marrow in them as there is in bones; in the selachia, however--for, be

it observed, they are gristle-spined--there is found in the case of

the flat space in the region of the backbone, a gristle-like substance

analogous to bone, and in this gristle-like substance there is a

liquid resembling marrow. In viviparous animals furnished with feet,

gristle formations are found in the region of the ears, in the

nostrils, and around certain extremities of the bones.

                                   9



    Furthermore, there are parts of other kinds, neither identical

with, nor altogether diverse from, the parts above enumerated: such as

nails, hooves, claws, and horns; and also, by the way, beaks, such

as birds are furnished with-all in the several animals that are

furnished therewithal. All these parts are flexible and fissile; but

bone is neither flexible nor fissile, but frangible.

    And the colours of horns and nails and claw and hoof follow the

colour of the skin and the hair. For according as the skin of an

animal is black, or white, or of medium hue, so are the horns, the

claws, or the hooves, as the case may be, of hue to match. And it is

the same with nails. The teeth, however, follow after the bones.

Thus in black men, such as the Aethiopians and the like, the teeth and

bones are white, but the nails are black, like the whole of the skin.

    Horns in general are hollow at their point of attachment to the

bone which juts out from the head inside the horn, but they have a

solid portion at the tip, and they are simple and undivided in

structure. In the case of the stag alone of all animals the horns

are solid throughout, and ramify into branches (or antlers). And,

whereas no other animal is known to shed its horns, the deer sheds its

horns annually, unless it has been castrated; and with regard to the

effects of castration in animals we shall have much to say

hereafter. Horns attach rather to the skin than to the bone; which

will account for the fact that there are found in Phrygia and

elsewhere cattle that can move their horns as freely as their ears.

    Of animals furnished with nails-and, by the way, all animals

have nails that have toes, and toes that have feet, except the

elephant; and the elephant has toes undivided and slightly

articulated, but has no nails whatsoever--of animals furnished with

nails, some are straight-nailed, like man; others are crooked

nailed, as the lion among animals that walk, and the eagle among

animals that fly.

                                  10



    The following are the properties of hair and of parts analogous to

hair, and of skin or hide. All viviparous animals furnished with

feet have hair; all oviparous animals furnished with feet have

horn-like tessellates; fishes, and fishes only, have scales-that is,

such oviparous fishes as have the crumbling egg or roe. For of the

lanky fishes, the conger has no such egg, nor the muraena, and the eel

has no egg at all.

    The hair differs in the way of thickness and fineness, and of

length, according to the locality of the part in which it is found,

and according to the quality of skin or hide on which it grows. For,

as a general rule, the thicker the hide, the harder and the thicker is

the hair; and the hair is inclined to grow in abundance and to a great

length in localities of the bodies hollow and moist, if the localities

be fitted for the growth of hair at all. The facts are similar in

the case of animals whether coated with scales or with tessellates.

With soft-haired animals the hair gets harder with good feeding, and

with hard-haired or bristly animals it gets softer and scantier from

the same cause. Hair differs in quality also according to the relative

heat or warmth of the locality: just as the hair in man is hard in

warm places and soft in cold ones. Again, straight hair is inclined to

be soft, and curly hair to be bristly.

                                  11



    Hair is naturally fissile, and in this respect it differs in

degree in diverse animals. In some animals the hair goes on

gradually hardening into bristle until it no longer resembles hair but

spine, as in the case of the hedgehog. And in like manner with the

nails; for in some animals the nail differs as regards solidity in

no way from bone.

    Of all animals man has the most delicate skin: that is, if we take

into consideration his relative size. In the skin or hide of all

animals there is a mucous liquid, scanty in some animals and plentiful

in others, as, for instance, in the hide of the ox; for men

manufacture glue out of it. (And, by the way, in some cases glue is

manufactured from fishes also.) The skin, when cut, is in itself

devoid of sensation; and this is especially the case with the skin

on the head, owing to there being no flesh between it and the skull.

And wherever the skin is quite by itself, if it be cut asunder, it

does not grow together again, as is seen in the thin part of the

jaw, in the prepuce, and the eyelid. In all animals the skin is one of

the parts that extends continuous and unbroken, and it comes to a stop

only where the natural ducts pour out their contents, and at the mouth

and nails.

    All sanguineous animals, then, have skin; but not all such animals

have hair, save only under the circumstances described above. The hair

changes its colour as animals grow old, and in man it turns white or

grey. With animals, in general, the change takes place, but not very

obviously, or not so obviously as in the case of the horse. Hair turns

grey from the point backwards to the roots. But, in the majority of

cases, grey hairs are white from the beginning; and this is a proof

that greyness of hair does not, as some believe to be the case,

imply withering or decrepitude, for no part is brought into

existence in a withered or decrepit condition.

    In the eruptive malady called the white-sickness all the hairs get

grey; and instances have been known where the hair became grey while

the patients were ill of the malady, whereas the grey hairs shed off

and black ones replaced them on their recovery. (Hair is more apt to

turn grey when it is kept covered than when exposed to the action of

the outer air.) In men, the hair over the temples is the first to turn

grey, and the hair in the front grows grey sooner than the hair at the

back; and the hair on the pubes is the last to change colour.

    Some hairs are congenital, others grow after the maturity of the

animal; but this occurs in man only. The congenital hairs are on the

head, the eyelids, and the eyebrows; of the later growths the hairs on

the pubes are the first to come, then those under the armpits, and,

thirdly, those on the chin; for, singularly enough, the regions

where congenital growths and the subsequent growths are found are

equal in number. The hair on the head grows scanty and sheds out to

a greater extent and sooner than all the rest. But this remark applies

only to hair in front; for no man ever gets bald at the back of his

head. Smoothness on the top of the head is termed 'baldness', but

smoothness on the eyebrows is denoted by a special term which means

'forehead-baldness'; and neither of these conditions of baldness

supervenes in a man until he shall have come under the influence of

sexual passion. For no boy ever gets bald, no woman, and no

castrated man. In fact, if a man be castrated before reaching puberty,

the later growths of hair never come at all; and, if the operation

take place subsequently, the aftergrowths, and these only, shed off;

or, rather, two of the growths shed off, but not that on the pubes.

    Women do not grow hairs on the chin; except that a scanty beard

grows on some women after the monthly courses have stopped; and

similar phenomenon is observed at times in priestesses in Caria, but

these cases are looked upon as portentous with regard to coming

events. The other after-growths are found in women, but more scanty

and sparse. Men and women are at times born constitutionally and

congenitally incapable of the after-growths; and individuals that

are destitute even of the growth upon the pubes are constitutionally

impotent.

    Hair as a rule grows more or less in length as the wearer grows in

age; chiefly the hair on the head, then that in the beard, and fine

hair grows longest of all. With some people as they grow old the

eyebrows grow thicker, to such an extent that they have to be cut off;

and this growth is owing to the fact that the eyebrows are situated at

a conjuncture of bones, and these bones, as age comes on, draw apart

and exude a gradual increase of moisture or rheum. The eyelashes do

not grow in size, but they shed when the wearer comes first under

the influence of sexual feelings, and shed all the quicker as this

influence is the more powerful; and these are the last hairs to grow

grey.

    Hairs if plucked out before maturity grow again; but they do not

grow again if plucked out afterwards. Every hair is supplied with a

mucous moisture at its root, and immediately after being plucked out

it can lift light articles if it touch them with this mucus.

    Animals that admit of diversity of colour in the hair admit of a

similar diversity to start with in the skin and in the cuticle of

the tongue.

    In some cases among men the upper lip and the chin is thickly

covered with hair, and in other cases these parts are smooth and the

cheeks are hairy; and, by the way, smooth-chinned men are less

inclined than bearded men to baldness.

    The hair is inclined to grow in certain diseases, especially in

consumption, and in old age, and after death; and under these

circumstances the hair hardens concomitantly with its growth, and

the same duplicate phenomenon is observable in respect of the nails.

    In the case of men of strong sexual passions the congenital

hairs shed the sooner, while the hairs of the after-growths are the

quicker to come. When men are afflicted with varicose veins they are

less inclined to take on baldness; and if they be bald when they

become thus afflicted, they have a tendency to get their hair again.

    If a hair be cut, it does not grow at the point of section; but it

gets longer by growing upward from below. In fishes the scales grow

harder and thicker with age, and when the amimal gets emaciated or

is growing old the scales grow harder. In quadrupeds as they grow

old the hair in some and the wool in others gets deeper but scantier

in amount: and the hooves or claws get larger in size; and the same is

the case with the beaks of birds. The claws also increase in size,

as do also the nails.

                                  12



    With regard to winged animals, such as birds, no creature is

liable to change of colour by reason of age, excepting the crane.

The wings of this bird are ash-coloured at first, but as it grows

old the wings get black. Again, owing to special climatic

influences, as when unusual frost prevails, a change is sometimes

observed to take place in birds whose plumage is of one uniform

colour; thus, birds that have dusky or downright black plumage turn

white or grey, as the raven, the sparrow, and the swallow; but no case

has ever yet been known of a change of colour from white to black.

(Further, most birds change the colour of their plumage at different

seasons of the year, so much so that a man ignorant of their habits

might be mistaken as to their identity.) Some animals change the

colour of their hair with a change in their drinking-water, for in

some countries the same species of animal is found white in one

district and black in another. And in regard to the commerce of the

sexes, water in many places is of such peculiar quality that rams,

if they have intercourse with the female after drinking it, beget

black lambs, as is the case with the water of the Psychrus

(so-called from its coldness), a river in the district of Assyritis in

the Chalcidic Peninsula, on the coast of Thrace; and in Antandria

there are two rivers of which one makes the lambs white and the

other black. The river Scamander also has the reputation of making

lambs yellow, and that is the reason, they say, why Homer designates

it the 'Yellow River.' Animals as a general rule have no hair on their

internal surfaces, and, in regard to their extremities, they have hair

on the upper, but not on the lower side.

    The hare, or dasypod, is the only animal known to have hair inside

its mouth and underneath its feet. Further, the so-called mousewhale

instead of teeth has hairs in its mouth resembling pigs' bristles.

    Hairs after being cut grow at the bottom but not at the top; if

feathers be cut off, they grow neither at top nor bottom, but shed and

fall out. Further, the bee's wing will not grow again after being

plucked off, nor will the wing of any creature that has undivided

wings. Neither will the sting grow again if the bee lose it, but the

creature will die of the loss.

                                  13



    In all sanguineous animals membranes are found. And membrane

resembles a thin close-textured skin, but its qualities are different,

as it admits neither of cleavage nor of extension. Membrane envelops

each one of the bones and each one of the viscera, both in the

larger and the smaller animals; though in the smaller animals the

membranes are indiscernible from their extreme tenuity and minuteness.

The largest of all the membranes are the two that surround the

brain, and of these two the one that lines the bony skull is

stronger and thicker than the one that envelops the brain; next in

order of magnitude comes the membrane that encloses the heart. If

membrane be bared and cut asunder it will not grow together again, and

the bone thus stripped of its membrane mortifies.

                                  14



    The omentum or caul, by the way, is membrane. All sanguineous

animals are furnished with this organ; but in some animals the organ

is supplied with fat, and in others it is devoid of it. The omentum

has both its starting-point and its attachment, with ambidental

vivipara, in the centre of the stomach, where the stomach has a kind

of suture; in non-ambidental vivipara it has its starting-point and

attachment in the chief of the ruminating stomachs.

                                  15



    The bladder also is of the nature of membrane, but of membrane

peculiar in kind, for it is extensile. The organ is not common to

all animals, but, while it is found in all the vivipara, the

tortoise is the only oviparous animal that is furnished therewithal.

The bladder, like ordinary membrane, if cut asunder will not grow

together again, unless the section be just at the commencement of

the urethra: except indeed in very rare cases, for instances of

healing have been known to occur. After death, the organ passes no

liquid excretion; but in life, in addition to the normal liquid

excretion, it passes at times dry excretion also, which turns into

stones in the case of sufferers from that malady. Indeed, instances

have been known of concretions in the bladder so shaped as closely

to resemble cockleshells.

    Such are the properties, then, of vein, sinew and skin, of fibre

and membrane, of hair, nail, claw and hoof, of horns, of teeth, of

beak, of gristle, of bones, and of parts that are analogous to any

of the parts here enumerated.

                                  16



    Flesh, and that which is by nature akin to it in sanguineous

animals, is in all cases situated in between the skin and the bone, or

the substance analogous to bone; for just as spine is a counterpart of

bone, so is the flesh-like substance of animals that are constructed a

spinous system the counterpart of the flesh of animals constructed

on an osseous one.

    Flesh can be divided asunder in any direction, not lengthwise only

as is the case with sinew and vein. When animals are subjected to

emaciation the flesh disappears, and the creatures become a mass of

veins and fibres; when they are over fed, fat takes the place of

flesh. Where the flesh is abundant in an animal, its veins are

somewhat small and the blood abnormally red; the viscera also and

the stomach are diminutive; whereas with animals whose veins are large

the blood is somewhat black, the viscera and the stomach are large,

and the flesh is somewhat scanty. And animals with small stomachs

are disposed to take on flesh.

                                  17



    Again, fat and suet differ from one another. Suet is frangible

in all directions and congeals if subjected to extreme cold, whereas

fat can melt but cannot freeze or congeal; and soups made of the flesh

of animals supplied with fat do not congeal or coagulate, as is

found with horse-flesh and pork; but soups made from the flesh of

animals supplied with suet do coagulate, as is seen with mutton and

goat's flesh. Further, fat and suet differ as to their localities: for

fat is found between the skin and flesh, but suet is found only at the

limit of the fleshy parts. Also, in animals supplied with fat the

omentum or caul is supplied with fat, and it is supplied with suet

in animals supplied with suet. Moreover, ambidental animals are

supplied with fat, and non-ambidentals with suet.

    Of the viscera the liver in some animals becomes fatty, as,

among fishes, is the case with the selachia, by the melting of whose

livers an oil is manufactured. These cartilaginous fish themselves

have no free fat at all in connexion with the flesh or with the

stomach. The suet in fish is fatty, and does not solidify or

congeal. All animals are furnished with fat, either intermingled

with their flesh, or apart. Such as have no free or separate fat are

less fat than others in stomach and omentum, as the eel; for it has

only a scanty supply of suet about the omentum. Most animals take on

fat in the belly, especially such animals as are little in motion.

    The brains of animals supplied with fat are oily, as in the pig;

of animals supplied with suet, parched and dry. But it is about the

kidneys more than any other viscera that animals are inclined to

take on fat; and the right kidney is always less supplied with fat

than the left kidney, and, be the two kidneys ever so fat, there is

always a space devoid of fat in between the two. Animals supplied with

suet are specially apt to have it about the kidneys, and especially

the sheep; for this animal is apt to die from its kidneys being

entirely enveloped. Fat or suet about the kidney is superinduced by

overfeeding, as is found at Leontini in Sicily; and consequently in

this district they defer driving out sheep to pasture until the day is

well on, with the view of limiting their food by curtailment of the

hours of pasture.

                                  18



    The part around the pupil of the eye is fatty in all animals,

and this part resembles suet in all animals that possess such a part

and that are not furnished with hard eyes.

    Fat animals, whether male or female, are more or less unfitted for

breeding purposes. Animals are disposed to take on fat more when old

than when young, and especially when they have attained their full

breadth and their full length and are beginning to grow depthways.

                                  19



    And now to proceed to the consideration of the blood. In

sanguineous animals blood is the most universal and the most

indispensable part; and it is not an acquired or adventitious part,

but it is a consubstantial part of all animals that are not corrupt or

moribund. All blood is contained in a vascular system, to wit, the

veins, and is found nowhere else, excepting in the heart. Blood is not

sensitive to touch in any animal, any more than the excretions of

the stomach; and the case is similar with the brain and the marrow.

When flesh is lacerated, blood exudes, if the animal be alive and

unless the flesh be gangrened. Blood in a healthy condition is

naturally sweet to the taste, and red in colour, blood that

deteriorates from natural decay or from disease more or less black.

Blood at its best, before it undergoes deterioration from either

natural decay or from disease, is neither very thick nor very thin. In

the living animal it is always liquid and warm, but, on issuing from

the body, it coagulates in all cases except in the case of the deer,

the roe, and the like animals; for, as a general rule, blood

coagulates unless the fibres be extracted. Bull's blood is the

quickest to coagulate.

    Animals that are internally and externally viviparous are more

abundantly supplied with blood than the sanguineous ovipara. Animals

that are in good condition, either from natural causes or from their

health having been attended to, have the blood neither too abundant-as

creatures just after drinking have the liquid inside them in

abundance-nor again very scanty, as is the case with animals when

exceedingly fat. For animals in this condition have pure blood, but

very little of it, and the fatter an animal gets the less becomes

its supply of blood; for whatsoever is fat is destitute of blood.

    A fat substance is incorruptible, but blood and all things

containing it corrupt rapidly, and this property characterizes

especially all parts connected with the bones. Blood is finest and

purest in man; and thickest and blackest in the bull and the ass, of

all vivipara. In the lower and the higher parts of the body blood is

thicker and blacker than in the central parts.

    Blood beats or palpitates in the veins of all animals alike all

over their bodies, and blood is the only liquid that permeates the

entire frames of living animals, without exception and at all times,

as long as life lasts. Blood is developed first of all in the heart of

animals before the body is differentiated as a whole. If blood be

removed or if it escape in any considerable quantity, animals fall

into a faint or swoon; if it be removed or if it escape in an

exceedingly large quantity they die. If the blood get exceedingly

liquid, animals fall sick; for the blood then turns into something

like ichor, or a liquid so thin that it at times has been known to

exude through the pores like sweat. In some cases blood, when

issuing from the veins, does not coagulate at all, or only here and

there. Whilst animals are sleeping the blood is less abundantly

supplied near the exterior surfaces, so that, if the sleeping creature

be pricked with a pin, the blood does not issue as copiously as it

would if the creature were awake. Blood is developed out of ichor by

coction, and fat in like manner out of blood. If the blood get

diseased, haemorrhoids may ensue in the nostril or at the anus, or the

veins may become varicose. Blood, if it corrupt in the body, has a

tendency to turn into pus, and pus may turn into a solid concretion.

    Blood in the female differs from that in the male, for,

supposing the male and female to be on a par as regards age and

general health, the blood in the female is thicker and blacker than in

the male; and with the female there is a comparative superabundance of

it in the interior. Of all female animals the female in man is the

most richly supplied with blood, and of all female animals the

menstruous discharges are the most copious in woman. The blood of

these discharges under disease turns into flux. Apart from the

menstrual discharges, the female in the human species is less

subject to diseases of the blood than the male.

    Women are seldom afflicted with varicose veins, with haemorrhoids,

or with bleeding at the nose, and, if any of these maladies supervene,

the menses are imperfectly discharged.

    Blood differs in quantity and appearance according to age; in very

young animals it resembles ichor and is abundant, in the old it is

thick and black and scarce, and in middle-aged animals its qualities

are intermediate. In old animals the blood coagulates rapidly, even

blood at the surface of the body; but this is not the case with

young animals. Ichor is, in fact, nothing else but unconcocted

blood: either blood that has not yet been concocted, or that has

become fluid again.

                                  20



    We now proceed to discuss the properties of marrow; for this is

one of the liquids found in certain sanguineous animals. All the

natural liquids of the body are contained in vessels: as blood in

veins, marrow in bones other moistures in membranous structures of the

skin

    In young animals the marrow is exceedingly sanguineous, but, as

animals grow old, it becomes fatty in animals supplied with fat, and

suet-like in animals with suet. All bones, however, are not supplied

with marrow, but only the hollow ones, and not all of these. For of

the bones in the lion some contain no marrow at all, and some are only

scantily supplied therewith; and that accounts, as was previously

observed, for the statement made by certain writers that the lion is

marrowless. In the bones of pigs it is found in small quantities;

and in the bones of certain animals of this species it is not found at

all.

    These liquids, then, are nearly always congenital in animals,

but milk and sperm come at a later time. Of these latter, that

which, whensoever it is present, is secreted in all cases

ready-made, is the milk; sperm, on the other hand, is not secreted out

in all cases, but in some only, as in the case of what are

designated thori in fishes.

    Whatever animals have milk, have it in their breasts. All

animals have breasts that are internally and externally viviparous, as

for instance all animals that have hair, as man and the horse; and the

cetaceans, as the dolphin, the porpoise, and the whale-for these

animals have breasts and are supplied with milk. Animals that are

oviparous or only externally viviparous have neither breasts nor milk,

as the fish and the bird.

    All milk is composed of a watery serum called 'whey', and a

consistent substance called curd (or cheese); and the thicker the

milk, the more abundant the curd. The milk, then, of non-ambidentals

coagulates, and that is why cheese is made of the milk of such animals

under domestication; but the milk of ambidentals does not coagulate,

nor their fat either, and the milk is thin and sweet. Now the

camel's milk is the thinnest, and that of the human species next after

it, and that of the ass next again, but cow's milk is the thickest.

Milk does not coagulate under the influence of cold, but rather runs

to whey; but under the influence of heat it coagulates and thickens.

As a general rule milk only comes to animals in pregnancy. When the

animal is pregnant milk is found, but for a while it is unfit for use,

and then after an interval of usefulness it becomes unfit for use

again. In the case of female animals not pregnant a small quantity

of milk has been procured by the employment of special food, and cases

have been actually known where women advanced in years on being

submitted to the process of milking have produced milk, and in some

cases have produced it in sufficient quantities to enable them to

suckle an infant.

    The people that live on and about Mount Oeta take such she-goats

as decline the male and rub their udders hard with nettles to cause an

irritation amounting to pain; hereupon they milk the animals,

procuring at first a liquid resembling blood, then a liquid mixed with

purulent matter, and eventually milk, as freely as from females

submitting to the male.

    As a general rule, milk is not found in the male of man or of

any other animal, though from time to time it has been found in a

male; for instance, once in Lemnos a he-goat was milked by its dugs

(for it has, by the way, two dugs close to the penis), and was

milked to such effect that cheese was made of the produce, and the

same phenomenon was repeated in a male of its own begetting. Such

occurrences, however, are regarded as supernatural and fraught with

omen as to futurity, and in point of fact when the Lemnian owner of

the animal inquired of the oracle, the god informed him that the

portent foreshadowed the acquisition of a fortune. With some men,

after puberty, milk can be produced by squeezing the breasts; cases

have been known where on their being subjected to a prolonged

milking process a considerable quantity of milk has been educed.

    In milk there is a fatty element, which in clotted milk gets to

resemble oil. Goat's milk is mixed with sheep's milk in Sicily, and

wherever sheep's milk is abundant. The best milk for clotting is not

only that where the cheese is most abundant, but that also where the

cheese is driest.

    Now some animals produce not only enough milk to rear their young,

but a superfluous amount for general use, for cheese-making and for

storage. This is especially the case with the sheep and the goat,

and next in degree with the cow. Mare's milk, by the way, and milk

of the she-ass are mixed in with Phrygian cheese. And there is more

cheese in cow's milk than in goat's milk; for graziers tell us that

from nine gallons of goat's milk they can get nineteen cheeses at an

obol apiece, and from the same amount of cow's milk, thirty. Other

animals give only enough of milk to rear their young withal, and no

superfluous amount and none fitted for cheese-making, as is the case

with all animals that have more than two breasts or dugs; for with

none of such animals is milk produced in superabundance or used for

the manufacture of cheese.

    The juice of the fig and rennet are employed to curdle milk. The

fig-juice is first squeezed out into wool; the wool is then washed and

rinsed, and the rinsing put into a little milk, and if this be mixed

with other milk it curdles Rennet is a kind of milk, for it is found

in the stomach of the animal while it is yet suckling.

                                  21



    Rennet then consists of milk with an admixture of fire, which

comes from the natural heat of the animal, as the milk is concocted.

All ruminating animals produce rennet, and, of ambidentals, the

hare. Rennet improves in quality the longer it is kept; and cow's

rennet, after being kept a good while, and also hare's rennet, is good

for diarrhoea, and the best of all rennet is that of the young deer.

    In milk-producing animals the comparative amount of the yield

varies with the size of the animal and the diversities of pasturage.

For instance, there are in Phasis small cattle that in all cases

give a copious supply of milk, and the large cows in Epirus yield each

one daily some nine gallons of milk, and half of this from each pair

of teats, and the milker has to stand erect, stooping forward a

little, as otherwise, if he were seated, he would be unable to reach

up to the teats. But, with the exception of the ass, all the

quadrupeds in Epirus are of large size, and relatively, the cattle and

the dogs are the largest. Now large animals require abundant

pasture, and this country supplies just such pasturage, and also

supplies diverse pasture grounds to suit the diverse seasons of the

year. The cattle are particularly large, and likewise the sheep of the

so-called Pyrrhic breed, the name being given in honour of King

Pyrrhus.

    Some pasture quenches milk, as Median grass or lucerne, and that

especially in ruminants; other feeding renders it copious, as

cytisus and vetch; only, by the way, cytisus in flower is not

recommended, as it has burning properties, and vetch is not good for

pregnant kine, as it causes increased difficulty in parturition.

However, beasts that have access to good feeding, as they are

benefited thereby in regard to pregnancy, so also being well nourished

produce milk in plenty. Some of the leguminous plants bring milk in

abundance, as for instance, a large feed of beans with the ewe, the

common she-goat, the cow, and the small she-goat; for this feeding

makes them drop their udders. And, by the way, the pointing of the

udder to the ground before parturition is a sign of there being plenty

of milk coming.

    Milk remains for a long time in the female, if she be kept from

the male and be properly fed, and, of quadrupeds, this is especially

true of the ewe; for the ewe can be milked for eight months. As a

general rule, ruminating animals give milk in abundance, and milk

fitted for cheese manufacture. In the neighbourhood of Torone cows run

dry for a few days before calving, and have milk all the rest of the

time. In women, milk of a livid colour is better than white for

nursing purposes; and swarthy women give healthier milk than fair

ones. Milk that is richest in cheese is the most nutritious, but

milk with a scanty supply of cheese is the more wholesome for

children.

                                  22



    All sanguineous animals eject sperm. As to what, and how, it

contributes to generation, these questions will be discussed in

another treatise. Taking the size of his body into account, man

emits more sperm than any other animal. In hairy-coated animals the

sperm is sticky, but in other animals it is not so. It is white in all

cases, and Herodotus is under a misapprehension when he states that

the Aethiopians eject black sperm.

    Sperm issues from the body white and consistent, if it be healthy,

and after quitting the body becomes thin and black. In frosty

weather it does not coagulate, but gets exceedingly thin and watery

both in colour and consistency; but it coagulates and thickens under

the influence of heat. If it be long in the womb before issuing out,

it comes more than usually thick; and sometimes it comes out dry and

compact. Sperm capable of impregnating or of fructification sinks in

water; sperm incapable Of producing that result dissolves away. But

there is no truth in what Ctesias has written about the sperm of the

elephant.

