




                                Book IX

                                   1



    OF the animals that are comparatively obscure and short-lived

the characters or dispositions are not so obvious to recognition as

are those of animals that are longer-lived. These latter animals

appear to have a natural capacity corresponding to each of the

passions: to cunning or simplicity, courage or timidity, to good

temper or to bad, and to other similar dispositions of mind.

    Some also are capable of giving or receiving instruction-of

receiving it from one another or from man: those that have the faculty

of hearing, for instance; and, not to limit the matter to audible

sound, such as can differentiate the suggested meanings of word and

gesture.

    In all genera in which the distinction of male and female is

found, Nature makes a similar differentiation in the mental

characteristics of the two sexes. This differentiation is the most

obvious in the case of human kind and in that of the larger animals

and the viviparous quadrupeds. In the case of these latter the

female softer in character, is the sooner tamed, admits more readily

of caressing, is more apt in the way of learning; as, for instance, in

the Laconian breed of dogs the female is cleverer than the male. Of

the Molossian breed of dogs, such as are employed in the chase are

pretty much the same as those elsewhere; but sheep-dogs of this

breed are superior to the others in size, and in the courage with

which they face the attacks of wild animals.

    Dogs that are born of a mixed breed between these two kinds

are remarkable for courage and endurance of hard labour.

    In all cases, excepting those of the bear and leopard, the

female is less spirited than the male; in regard to the two

exceptional cases, the superiority in courage rests with the female.

With all other animals the female is softer in disposition than the

male, is more mischievous, less simple, more impulsive, and more

attentive to the nurture of the young: the male, on the other hand, is

more spirited than the female, more savage, more simple and less

cunning. The traces of these differentiated characteristics are more

or less visible everywhere, but they are especially visible where

character is the more developed, and most of all in man.

    The fact is, the nature of man is the most rounded off and

complete, and consequently in man the qualities or capacities above

referred to are found in their perfection. Hence woman is more

compassionate than man, more easily moved to tears, at the same time

is more jealous, more querulous, more apt to scold and to strike.

She is, furthermore, more prone to despondency and less hopeful than

the man, more void of shame or self-respect, more false of speech,

more deceptive, and of more retentive memory. She is also more

wakeful, more shrinking, more difficult to rouse to action, and

requires a smaller quantity of nutriment.

    As was previously stated, the male is more courageous than the

female, and more sympathetic in the way of standing by to help. Even

in the case of molluscs, when the cuttle-fish is struck with the

trident the male stands by to help the female; but when the male is

struck the female runs away.

    There is enmity between such animals as dwell in the same

localities or subsist on the food. If the means of subsistence run

short, creatures of like kind will fight together. Thus it is said

that seals which inhabit one and the same district will fight, male

with male, and female with female, until one combatant kills the

other, or one is driven away by the other; and their young do even

in like manner.

    All creatures are at enmity with the carnivores, and the

carnivores with all the rest, for they all subsist on living

creatures. Soothsayers take notice of cases where animals keep apart

from one another, and cases where they congregate together; calling

those that live at war with one another 'dissociates', and those

that dwell in peace with one another 'associates'. One may go so far

as to say that if there were no lack or stint of food, then those

animals that are now afraid of man or are wild by nature would be tame

and familiar with him, and in like manner with one another. This is

shown by the way animals are treated in Egypt, for owing to the fact

that food is constantly supplied to them the very fiercest creatures

live peaceably together. The fact is they are tamed by kindness, and

in some places crocodiles are tame to their priestly keeper from being

fed by him. And elsewhere also the same phenomenon is to be observed.

    The eagle and the snake are enemies, for the eagle lives on

snakes; so are the ichneumon and the venom-spider, for the ichneumon

preys upon the latter. In the case of birds, there is mutual enmity

between the poecilis, the crested lark, the woodpecker (?), and the

chloreus, for they devour one another's eggs; so also between the crow

and the owl; for, owing to the fact that the owl is dim-sighted by

day, the crow at midday preys upon the owl's eggs, and the owl at

night upon the crow's, each having the whip-hand of the other, turn

and turn about, night and day.

    There is enmity also between the owl and the wren; for the

latter also devours the owl's eggs. In the daytime all other little

birds flutter round the owl-a practice which is popularly termed

'admiring him'-buffet him, and pluck out his feathers; in

consequence of this habit, bird-catchers use the owl as a decoy for

catching little birds of all kinds.

    The so-called presbys or 'old man' is at war with the weasel and

the crow, for they prey on her eggs and her brood; and so the

turtle-dove with the pyrallis, for they live in the same districts and

on the same food; and so with the green wood pecker and the libyus;

and so with kite and the raven, for, owing to his having the advantage

from stronger talons and more rapid flight the former can steal

whatever the latter is holding, so that it is food also that makes

enemies of these. In like manner there is war between birds that get

their living from the sea, as between the brenthus, the gull, and

the harpe; and so between the buzzard on one side and the toad and

snake on the other, for the buzzard preys upon the eggs of the two

others; and so between the turtle-dove and the chloreus; the

chloreus kills the dove, and the crow kills the so-called

drummer-bird.

    The aegolius, and birds of prey in general, prey upon the

calaris, and consequently there is war between it and them; and so

is there war between the gecko-lizard and the spider, for the former

preys upon the latter; and so between the woodpecker and the heron,

for the former preys upon the eggs and brood of the latter. And so

between the aegithus and the ass, owing to the fact that the ass, in

passing a furze-bush, rubs its sore and itching parts against the

prickles; by so doing, and all the more if it brays, it topples the

eggs and the brood out of the nest, the young ones tumble out in

fright, and the mother-bird, to avenge this wrong, flies at the

beast and pecks at his sore places.

    The wolf is at war with the ass, the bull, and the fox, for as

being a carnivore, he attacks these other animals; and so for the same

reason with the fox and the circus, for the circus, being

carnivorous and furnished with crooked talons, attacks and maims the

animal. And so the raven is at war with the bull and the ass, for it

flies at them, and strikes them, and pecks at their eyes; and so

with the eagle and the heron, for the former, having crooked talons,

attacks the latter, and the latter usually succumbs to the attack; and

so the merlin with the vulture; and the crex with the eleus-owl, the

blackbird, and the oriole (of this latter bird, by the way, the

story goes that he was originally born out of a funeral pyre): the

cause of warfare is that the crex injures both them and their young.

The nuthatch and the wren are at war with the eagle; the nuthatch

breaks the eagle's eggs, so the eagle is at war with it on special

grounds, though, as a bird of prey, it carries on a general war all

round. The horse and the anthus are enemies, and the horse will

drive the bird out of the field where he is grazing: the bird feeds on

grass, and sees too dimly to foresee an attack; it mimics the

whinnying of the horse, flies at him, and tries to frighten him

away; but the horse drives the bird away, and whenever he catches it

he kills it: this bird lives beside rivers or on marsh ground; it

has pretty plumage, and finds its without trouble. The ass is at

enmity with the lizard, for the lizard sleeps in his manger, gets into

his nostril, and prevents his eating.

    Of herons there are three kinds: the ash coloured, the white,

and the starry heron (or bittern). Of these the first mentioned

submits with reluctance to the duties of incubation, or to union of

the sexes; in fact, it screams during the union, and it is said

drips blood from its eyes; it lays its eggs also in an awkward manner,

not unattended with pain. It is at war with certain creatures that

do it injury: with the eagle for robbing it, with the fox for worrying

it at night, and with the lark for stealing its eggs.

    The snake is at war with the weasel and the pig; with the weasel

when they are both at home, for they live on the same food; with the

pig for preying on her kind. The merlin is at war with the fox; it

strikes and claws it, and, as it has crooked talons, it kills the

animal's young. The raven and the fox are good friends, for the

raven is at enmity with the merlin; and so when the merlin assails the

fox the raven comes and helps the animal. The vulture and the merlin

are mutual enemies, as being both furnished with crooked talons. The

vulture fights with the eagle, and so, by the way, does does swan; and

the swan is often victorious: moreover, of all birds swans are most

prone to the killing of one another.

    In regard to wild creatures, some sets are at enmity with

other sets at all times and under all circumstances; others, as in the

case of man and man, at special times and under incidental

circumstances. The ass and the acanthis are enemies; for the bird

lives on thistles, and the ass browses on thistles when they are young

and tender. The anthus, the acanthis, and the aegithus are at enmity

with one another; it is said that the blood of the anthus will not

intercommingle with the blood of the aegithus. The crow and the

heron are friends, as also are the sedge-bird and lark, the laedus and

the celeus or green woodpecker; the woodpecker lives on the banks of

rivers and beside brakes, the laedus lives on rocks and bills, and

is greatly attached to its nesting-place. The piphinx, the harpe,

and the kite are friends; as are the fox and the snake, for both

burrow underground; so also are the blackbird and the turtle-dove. The

lion and the thos or civet are enemies, for both are carnivorous and

live on the same food. Elephants fight fiercely with one another,

and stab one another with their tusks; of two combatants the beaten

one gets completely cowed, and dreads the sound of his conqueror's

voice. These animals differ from one another an extraordinary extent

in the way of courage. Indians employ these animals for war

purposes, irrespective of sex; the females, however, are less in

size and much inferior in point of spirit. An elephant by pushing with

his big tusks can batter down a wall, and will butt with his

forehead at a palm until he brings it down, when he stamps on it and

lays it in orderly fashion on the ground. Men hunt the elephant in the

following way: they mount tame elephants of approved spirit and

proceed in quest of wild animals; when they come up with these they

bid the tame brutes to beat the wild ones until they tire the latter

completely. Hereupon the driver mounts a wild brute and guides him

with the application of his metal prong; after this the creature

soon becomes tame, and obeys guidance. Now when the driver is on their

back they are all tractable, but after he has dismounted, some are

tame and others vicious; in the case of these latter, they tie their

front-legs with ropes to keep them quiet. The animal is hunted whether

young or full grown.

    Thus we see that in the case of the creatures above mentioned

their mutual friendship or the is due to the food they feed on and the

life they lead.

                                   2



    Of fishes, such as swim in shoals together are friendly to one

another; such as do not so swim are enemies. Some fishes swarm

during the spawning season; others after they have spawned. To state

the matter comprehensively, we may say that the following are shoaling

fish: the tunny, the maenis, the sea-gudgeon, the bogue, the

horse-mackerel, the coracine, the synodon or dentex, the red mullet,

the sphyraena, the anthias, the eleginus, the atherine, the

sarginus, the gar-fish, (the squid,) the rainbow-wrasse, the

pelamyd, the mackerel, the coly-mackerel. Of these some not only

swim in shoals, but go in pairs inside the shoal; the rest without

exception swim in pairs, and only swim in shoals at certain periods:

that is, as has been said, when they are heavy with spawn or after

they have spawned.

    The basse and the grey mullet are bitter enemies, but they swarm

together at certain times; for at times not only do fishes of the same

species swarm together, but also those whose feeding-grounds are

identical or adjacent, if the food-supply be abundant. The grey mullet

is often found alive with its tail lopped off, and the conger with all

that part of its body removed that lies to the rear of the vent; in

the case of the mullet the injury is wrought by the basse, in that

of the conger-eel by the muraena. There is war between the larger

and the lesser fishes: for the big fishes prey on the little ones.

So much on the subject of marine animals.

                                   3



    The characters of animals, as has been observed, differ in respect

to timidity, to gentleness, to courage, to tameness, to

intelligence, and to stupidity.

    The sheep is said to be naturally dull and stupid. Of all

quadrupeds it is the most foolish: it will saunter away to lonely

places with no object in view; oftentimes in stormy weather it will

stray from shelter; if it be overtaken by a snowstorm, it will stand

still unless the shepherd sets it in motion; it will stay behind and

perish unless the shepherd brings up the rams; it will then follow

home.

    If you catch hold of a goat's beard at the extremity-the beard

is of a substance resembling hair-all the companion goats will stand

stock still, staring at this particular goat in a kind of

dumbfounderment.

    You will have a warmer bed in amongst the goats than among the

sheep, because the goats will be quieter and will creep up towards

you; for the goat is more impatient of cold than the sheep.

    Shepherds train sheep to close in together at a clap of their

hands, for if, when a thunderstorm comes on, a ewe stays behind

without closing in, the storm will kill it if it be with young;

consequently if a sudden clap or noise is made, they close in together

within the sheepfold by reason of their training.

    Even bulls, when they are roaming by themselves apart from the

herd, are killed by wild animals.

    Sheep and goats lie crowded together, kin by kin. When the sun

turns early towards its setting, the goats are said to lie no longer

face to face, but back to back.

                                   4



    Cattle at pasture keep together in their accustomed herds, and

if one animal strays away the rest will follow; consequently if the

herdsmen lose one particular animal, they keep close watch on all

the rest.

    When mares with their colts pasture together in the same field,

if one dam dies the others will take up the rearing of the colt. In

point of fact, the mare appears to be singularly prone by nature to

maternal fondness; in proof whereof a barren mare will steal the

foal from its dam, will tend it with all the solicitude of a mother,

but, as it will be unprovided with mother's milk, its solicitude

will prove fatal to its charge.

                                   5



    Among wild quadrupeds the hind appears to be pre-eminently

intelligent; for example, in its habit of bringing forth its young

on the sides of public roads, where the fear of man forbids the

approach of wild animals. Again, after parturition, it first

swallows the afterbirth, then goes in quest of the seseli shrub, and

after eating of it returns to its young. The mother takes its young

betimes to her lair, so leading it to know its place of refuge in time

of danger; this lair is a precipitous rock, with only one approach,

and there it is said to hold its own against all comers. The male when

it gets fat, which it does in a high degree in autumn, disappears,

abandoning its usual resorts, apparently under an idea that its

fatness facilitates its capture. They shed their horns in places

difficult of access or discovery, whence the proverbial expression

of 'the place where the stag sheds his horns'; the fact being that, as

having parted with their weapons, they take care not to be seen. The

saying is that no man has ever seen the animal's left horn; that the

creature keeps it out of sight because it possesses some medicinal

property.

    In their first year stags grow no horns, but only an excrescence

indicating where horns will be, this excrescence being short and

thick. In their second year they grow their horns for the first

time, straight in shape, like pegs for hanging clothes on; and on this

account they have an appropriate nickname. In the third year the

antlers are bifurcate; in the fourth year they grow trifurcate; and so

they go on increasing in complexity until the creature is six years

old: after this they grow their horns without any specific

differentiation, so that you cannot by observation of them tell the

animal's age. But the patriarchs of the herd may be told chiefly by

two signs; in the first place they have few teeth or none at all, and,

in the second place, they have ceased to grow the pointed tips to

their antlers. The forward-pointing tips of the growing horns (that is

to say the brow antlers), with which the animal meets attack, are

technically termed its 'defenders'; with these the patriarchs are

unprovided, and their antlers merely grow straight upwards. Stags shed

their horns annually, in or about the month of May; after shedding,

they conceal themselves, it is said, during the daytime, and, to avoid

the flies, hide in thick copses; during this time, until they have

grown their horns, they feed at night-time. The horns at first grow in

a kind of skin envelope, and get rough by degrees; when they reach

their full size the animal basks in the sun, to mature and dry them.

When they need no longer rub them against tree-trunks they quit

their hiding places, from a sense of security based upon the

possession of arms defensive and offensive. An Achaeine stag has

been caught with a quantity of green ivy grown over its horns, it

having grown apparently, as on fresh green wood, when the horns were

young and tender. When a stag is stung by a venom-spider or similar

insect, it gathers crabs and eats them; it is said to be a good

thing for man to drink the juice, but the taste is disagreeable. The

hinds after parturition at once swallow the afterbirth, and it is

impossible to secure it, for the hind catches it before it falls to

the ground: now this substance is supposed to have medicinal

properties. When hunted the creatures are caught by singing or

pipe-playing on the part of the hunters; they are so pleased with

the music that they lie down on the grass. If there be two hunters,

one before their eyes sings or plays the pipe, the other keeps out

of sight and shoots, at a signal given by the confederate. If the

animal has its ears cocked, it can hear well and you cannot escape its

ken; if its ears are down, you can.

                                   6



    When bears are running away from their pursuers they push their

cubs in front of them, or take them up and carry them; when they are

being overtaken they climb up a tree. When emerging from their

winter-den, they at once take to eating cuckoo-pint, as has been said,

and chew sticks of wood as though they were cutting teeth.

    Many other quadrupeds help themselves in clever ways. Wild goats

in Crete are said, when wounded by arrows, to go in search of dittany,

which is supposed to have the property of ejecting arrows in the body.

Dogs, when they are ill, eat some kind of grass and produce

vomiting. The panther, after eating panther's-bane, tries to find some

human excrement, which is said to heal its pain. This panther's-bane

kills lions as well. Hunters hang up human excrement in a vessel

attached to the boughs of a tree, to keep the animal from straying

to any distance; the animal meets its end in leaping up to the

branch and trying to get at the medicine. They say that the panther

has found out that wild animals are fond of the scent it emits;

that, when it goes a-hunting, it hides itself; that the other

animals come nearer and nearer, and that by this stratagem it can

catch even animals as swift of foot as stags.

    The Egyptian ichneumon, when it sees the serpent called the asp,

does not attack it until it has called in other ichneumons to help; to

meet the blows and bites of their enemy the assailants beplaster

themselves with mud, by first soaking in the river and then rolling on

the ground.

    When the crocodile yawns, the trochilus flies into his mouth and

cleans his teeth. The trochilus gets his food thereby, and the

crocodile gets ease and comfort; it makes no attempt to injure its

little friend, but, when it wants it to go, it shakes its neck in

warning, lest it should accidentally bite the bird.

    The tortoise, when it has partaken of a snake, eats marjoram; this

action has been actually observed. A man saw a tortoise perform this

operation over and over again, and every time it plucked up some

marjoram go back to partake of its prey; he thereupon pulled the

marjoram up by the roots, and the consequence was the tortoise died.

The weasel, when it fights with a snake, first eats wild rue, the

smell of which is noxious to the snake. The dragon, when it eats

fruit, swallows endive-juice; it has been seen in the act. Dogs,

when they suffer from worms, eat the standing corn. Storks, and all

other birds, when they get a wound fighting, apply marjoram to the

place injured.

    Many have seen the locust, when fighting with the snake get a

tight hold of the snake by the neck. The weasel has a clever way of

getting the better of birds; it tears their throats open, as wolves do

with sheep. Weasels fight desperately with mice-catching snakes, as

they both prey on the same animal.

    In regard to the instinct of hedgehogs, it has been observed

in many places that, when the wind is shifting from north to south,

and from south to north, they shift the outlook of their

earth-holes, and those that are kept in domestication shift over

from one wall to the other. The story goes that a man in Byzantium got

into high repute for foretelling a change of weather, all owing to his

having noticed this habit of the hedgehog.

    The polecat or marten is about as large as the smaller breed of

Maltese dogs. In the thickness of its fur, in its look, in the white

of its belly, and in its love of mischief, it resembles the weasel; it

is easily tamed; from its liking for honey it is a plague to

bee-hives; it preys on birds like the cat. Its genital organ, as has

been said, consists of bone: the organ of the male is supposed to be a

cure for strangury; doctors scrape it into powder, and administer it

in that form.

                                   7



    In a general way in the lives of animals many resemblances to

human life may be observed. Pre-eminent intelligence will be seen more

in small creatures than in large ones, as is exemplified in the case

of birds by the nest building of the swallow. In the same way as men

do, the bird mixes mud and chaff together; if it runs short of mud, it

souses its body in water and rolls about in the dry dust with wet

feathers; furthermore, just as man does, it makes a bed of straw,

putting hard material below for a foundation, and adapting all to suit

its own size. Both parents co-operate in the rearing of the young;

each of the parents will detect, with practised eye, the young one

that has had a helping, and will take care it is not helped twice

over; at first the parents will rid the nest of excrement, but, when

the young are grown, they will teach their young to shift their

position and let their excrement fall over the side of the nest.

    Pigeons exhibit other phenomena with a similar likeness to the

ways of humankind. In pairing the same male and the same female keep

together; and the union is only broken by the death of one of the

two parties. At the time of parturition in the female the

sympathetic attentions of the male are extraordinary; if the female is

afraid on account of the impending parturition to enter the nest,

the male will beat her and force her to come in. When the young are

born, he will take and masticate pieces of suitable food, will open

the beaks of the fledglings, and inject these pieces, thus preparing

them betimes to take food. (When the male bird is about to expel the

the young ones from the nest he cohabits with them all.) As a

general rule these birds show this conjugal fidelity, but occasionally

a female will cohabit with other than her mate. These birds are

combative, and quarrel with one another, and enter each other's nests,

though this occurs but seldom; at a distance from their nests this

quarrelsomeness is less marked, but in the close neighbourhood of

their nests they will fight desperately. A peculiarity common to the

tame pigeon, the ring-dove and the turtle-dove is that they do not

lean the head back when they are in the act of drinking, but only when

they have fully quenched their thirst. The turtle-dove and the

ring-dove both have but one mate, and let no other come nigh; both

sexes co-operate in the process of incubation. It is difficult to

distinguish between the sexes except by an examination of their

interiors. Ring-doves are long-lived; cases have been known where such

birds were twenty-five years old, thirty years old, and in some

cases forty. As they grow old their claws increase in size, and

pigeon-fanciers cut the claws; as far as one can see, the birds suffer

no other perceptible disfigurement by their increase in age.

Turtle-doves and pigeons that are blinded by fanciers for use as

decoys, live for eight years. Partridges live for about fifteen years.

Ring-doves and turtle-doves always build their nests in the same place

year after year. The male, as a general rule, is more long-lived

than the female; but in the case of pigeons some assert that the

male dies before the female, taking their inference from the

statements of persons who keep decoy-birds in captivity. Some

declare that the male sparrow lives only a year, pointing to the

fact that early in spring the male sparrow has no black beard, but has

one later on, as though the blackbearded birds of the last year had

all died out; they also say that the females are the longer lived,

on the grounds that they are caught in amongst the young birds and

that their age is rendered manifest by the hardness about their beaks.

Turtle-doves in summer live in cold places, (and in warm places during

the winter); chaffinches affect warm habitations in summer and cold

ones in winter.

                                   8



    Birds of a heavy build, such as quails, partridges, and the

like, build no nests; indeed, where they are incapable of flight, it

would be of no use if they could do so. After scraping a hole on a

level piece of ground-and it is only in such a place that they lay

their eggs-they cover it over with thorns and sticks for security

against hawks and eagles, and there lay their eggs and hatch them;

after the hatching is over, they at once lead the young out from the

nest, as they are not able to fly afield for food for them. Quails and

partridges, like barn-door hens, when they go to rest, gather their

brood under their wings. Not to be discovered, as might be the case if

they stayed long in one spot, they do not hatch the eggs where they

laid them. When a man comes by chance upon a young brood, and tries to

catch them, the hen-bird rolls in front of the hunter, pretending to

be lame: the man every moment thinks he is on the point of catching

her, and so she draws him on and on, until every one of her brood

has had time to escape; hereupon she returns to the nest and calls the

young back. The partridge lays not less than ten eggs, and often

lays as many as sixteen. As has been observed, the bird has

mischievous and deceitful habits. In the spring-time, a noisy

scrimmage takes place, out of which the male-birds emerge each with

a hen. Owing to the lecherous nature of the bird, and from a dislike

to the hen sitting, the males, if they find any eggs, roll them over

and over until they break them in pieces; to provide against this

the female goes to a distance and lays the eggs, and often, under

the stress of parturition, lays them in any chance spot that offers;

if the male be near at hand, then to keep the eggs intact she refrains

from visiting them. If she be seen by a man, then, just as with her

fledged brood, she entices him off by showing herself close at his

feet until she has drawn him to a distance. When the females have

run away and taken to sitting, the males in a pack take to screaming

and fighting; when thus engaged, they have the nickname of 'widowers'.

The bird who is beaten follows his victor, and submits to be covered

by him only; and the beaten bird is covered by a second one or by

any other, only clandestinely without the victor's knowledge; this

is so, not at all times, but at a particular season of the year, and

with quails as well as with partridges. A similar proceeding takes

place occasionally with barn-door cocks: for in temples, where cocks

are set apart as dedicate without hens, they all as a matter of course

tread any new-comer. Tame partridges tread wild birds, pecket their

heads, and treat them with every possible outrage. The leader of the

wild birds, with a counter-note of challenge, pushes forward to attack

the decoy-bird, and after he has been netted, another advances with

a similar note. This is what is done if the decoy be a male; but if it

be a female that is the decoy and gives the note, and the leader of

the wild birds give a counter one, the rest of the males set upon

him and chase him away from the female for making advances to her

instead of to them; in consequence of this the male often advances

without uttering any cry, so that no other may hear him and come and

give him battle; and experienced fowlers assert that sometimes the

male bird, when he approaches the female, makes her keep silence, to

avoid having to give battle to other males who might have heard him.

The partridge has not only the note here referred to, but also a

thin shrill cry and other notes. Oftentimes the hen-bird rises from

off her brood when she sees the male showing attentions to the

female decoy; she will give the counter note and remain still, so as

to be trodden by him and divert him from the decoy. The quail and

the partridge are so intent upon sexual union that they often come

right in the way of the decoy-birds, and not seldom alight upon

their heads. So much for the sexual proclivities of the partridge, for

the way in which it is hunted, and the general nasty habits of the

bird.

    As has been said, quails and partridges build their nests upon

the ground, and so also do some of the birds that are capable of

sustained flight. Further, for instance, of such birds, the lark and

the woodcock, as well as the quail, do not perch on a branch, but

squat upon the ground.

                                   9



    The woodpecker does not squat on the ground, but pecks at the bark

of trees to drive out from under it maggots and gnats; when they

emerge, it licks them up with its tongue, which is large and flat.

It can run up and down a tree in any way, even with the head

downwards, like the gecko-lizard. For secure hold upon a tree, its

claws are better adapted than those of the daw; it makes its way by

sticking these claws into the bark. One species of woodpecker is

smaller than a blackbird, and has small reddish speckles; a second

species is larger than the blackbird, and a third is not much

smaller than a barn-door hen. It builds a nest on trees, as has been

said, on olive trees amongst others. It feeds on the maggots and

ants that are under the bark: it is so eager in the search for maggots

that it is said sometimes to hollow a tree out to its downfall. A

woodpecker once, in course of domestication, was seen to insert an

almond into a hole in a piece of timber, so that it might remain

steady under its pecking; at the third peck it split the shell of

the fruit, and then ate the kernel.

                                  10



    Many indications of high intelligence are given by cranes. They

will fly to a great distance and up in the air, to command an

extensive view; if they see clouds and signs of bad weather they fly

down again and remain still. They, furthermore, have a leader in their

flight, and patrols that scream on the confines of the flock so as

to be heard by all. When they settle down, the main body go to sleep

with their heads under their wing, standing first on one leg and

then on the other, while their leader, with his head uncovered,

keeps a sharp look out, and when he sees anything of importance

signals it with a cry.

    Pelicans that live beside rivers swallow the large smooth

mussel-shells: after cooking them inside the crop that precedes the

stomach, they spit them out, so that, now when their shells are

open, they may pick the flesh out and eat it.

                                  11



    Of wild birds, the nests are fashioned to meet the exigencies of

existence and ensure the security of the young. Some of these birds

are fond of their young and take great care of them, others are

quite the reverse; some are clever in procuring subsistence, others

are not so. Some of these birds build in ravines and clefts, and on

cliffs, as, for instance, the so-called charadrius, or stone-curlew;

this bird is in no way noteworthy for plumage or voice; it makes an

appearance at night, but in the daytime keeps out of sight.

    The hawk also builds in inaccessible places. Although a ravenous

bird, it will never eat the heart of any bird it catches; this has

been observed in the case of the quail, the thrush, and other birds.

They modify betimes their method of hunting, for in summer they do not

grab their prey as they do at other seasons.

    Of the vulture, it is said that no one has ever seen either

its young or its nest; on this account and on the ground that all of a

sudden great numbers of them will appear without any one being able to

tell from whence they come, Herodorus, the father of Bryson the

sophist, says that it belongs to some distant and elevated land. The

reason is that the bird has its nest on inaccessible crags, and is

found only in a few localities. The female lays one egg as a rule, and

two at the most.

    Some birds live on mountains or in forests, as the hoopoe and

the brenthus; this latter bird finds his food with ease and has a

musical voice. The wren lives in brakes and crevices; it is

difficult of capture, keeps out of sight, is gentle of disposition,

finds its food with ease, and is something of a mechanic. It goes by

the nickname of 'old man' or 'king'; and the story goes that for

this reason the eagle is at war with him.

                                  12



    Some birds live on the sea-shore, as the wagtail; the bird is of a

mischievous nature, hard to capture, but when caught capable of

complete domestication; it is a cripple, as being weak in its hinder

quarters.

    Web-footed birds without exception live near the sea or rivers

or pools, as they naturally resort to places adapted to their

structure. Several birds, however, with cloven toes live near pools or

marshes, as, for instance, the anthus lives by the side of rivers; the

plumage of this bird is pretty, and it finds its food with ease. The

catarrhactes lives near the sea; when it makes a dive, it will keep

under water for as long as it would take a man to walk a furlong; it

is less than the common hawk. Swans are web-footed, and live near

pools and marshes; they find their food with ease, are

good-tempered, are fond of their young, and live to a green old age.

If the eagle attacks them they will repel the attack and get the

better of their assailant, but they are never the first to attack.

They are musical, and sing chiefly at the approach of death; at this

time they fly out to sea, and men, when sailing past the coast of

Libya, have fallen in with many of them out at sea singing in mournful

strains, and have actually seen some of them dying.

    The cymindis is seldom seen, as it lives on mountains; it is

black in colour, and about the size of the hawk called the

'dove-killer'; it is long and slender in form. The Ionians call the

bird by this name; Homer in the Iliad mentions it in the line:



          Chalcis its name with those of heavenly birth,

           But called Cymindis by the sons of earth.



    The hybris, said by some to be the same as the eagle-owl, is

never seen by daylight, as it is dim-sighted, but during the night

it hunts like the eagle; it will fight the eagle with such desperation

that the two combatants are often captured alive by shepherds; it lays

two eggs, and, like others we have mentioned, it builds on rocks and

in caverns. Cranes also fight so desperately among themselves as to be

caught when fighting, for they will not leave off; the crane lays

two eggs.

                                  13



    The jay has a great variety of notes: indeed, might almost say

it had a different note for every day in the year. It lays about

nine eggs; builds its nest on trees, out of hair and tags of wool;

when acorns are getting scarce, it lays up a store of them in hiding.

    It is a common story of the stork that the old birds are fed

by their grateful progeny. Some tell a similar story of the bee-eater,

and declare that the parents are fed by their young not only when

growing old, but at an early period, as soon as the young are

capable of feeding them; and the parent-birds stay inside the nest.

The under part of the bird's wing is pale yellow; the upper part is

dark blue, like that of the halcyon; the tips of the wings are About

autumn-time it lays six or seven eggs, in overhanging banks where

the soil is soft; there it burrows into the ground to a depth of six

feet.

    The greenfinch, so called from the colour of its belly, is as

large as a lark; it lays four or five eggs, builds its nest out of the

plant called comfrey, pulling it up by the roots, and makes an

under-mattress to lie on of hair and wool. The blackbird and the jay

build their nests after the same fashion. The nest of the penduline

tit shows great mechanical skill; it has the appearance of a ball of

flax, and the hole for entry is very small.

    People who live where the bird comes from say that there

exists a cinnamon bird which brings the cinnamon from some unknown

localities, and builds its nest out of it; it builds on high trees

on the slender top branches. They say that the inhabitants attach

leaden weights to the tips of their arrows and therewith bring down

the nests, and from the intertexture collect the cinnamon sticks.

                                  14



    The halcyon is not much larger than the sparrow. Its colour is

dark blue, green, and light purple; the whole body and wings, and

especially parts about the neck, show these colours in a mixed way,

without any colour being sharply defined; the beak is light green,

long and slender: such, then, is the look of the bird. Its nest is

like sea-balls, i.e. the things that by the name of halosachne or

seafoam, only the colour is not the same. The colour of the nest is

light red, and the shape is that of the long-necked gourd. The nests

are larger than the largest sponge, though they vary in size; they are

roofed over, and great part of them is solid and great part hollow. If

you use a sharp knife it is not easy to cut the nest through; but if

you cut it, and at the same time bruise it with your hand, it will

soon crumble to pieces, like the halosachne. The opening is small,

just enough for a tiny entrance, so that even if the nest upset the

sea does not enter in; the hollow channels are like those in

sponges. It is not known for certain of what material the nest is

constructed; it is possibly made of the backbones of the gar-fish;

for, by the way, the bird lives on fish. Besides living on the

shore, it ascends fresh-water streams. It lays generally about five

eggs, and lays eggs all its life long, beginning to do so at the age

of four months.

                                  15



    The hoopoe usually constructs its nest out of human excrement.

It changes its appearance in summer and in winter, as in fact do the

great majority of wild birds. (The titmouse is said to lay a very

large quantity of eggs: next to the ostrich the blackheaded tit is

said by some to lay the largest number of eggs; seventeen eggs have

been seen; it lays, however, more than twenty; it is said always to

lay an odd number. Like others we have mentioned, it builds in

trees; it feeds on caterpillars.) A peculiarity of this bird and of

the nightingale is that the outer extremity of the tongue is not

sharp-pointed.

    The aegithus finds its food with ease, has many young, and walks

with a limp. The golden oriole is apt at learning, is clever at making

a living, but is awkward in flight and has an ugly plumage.

                                  16



    The reed-warbler makes its living as easily as any other bird,

sits in summer in a shady spot facing the wind, in winter in a sunny

and sheltered place among reeds in a marsh; it is small in size,

with a pleasant note. The so-called chatterer has a pleasant note,

beautiful plumage, makes a living cleverly, and is graceful in form;

it appears to be alien to our country; at all events it is seldom seen

at a distance from its own immediate home.

                                  17



    The crake is quarrelsome, clever at making a living, but in

other ways an unlucky bird. The bird called sitta is quarrelsome,

but clever and tidy, makes its living with ease, and for its

knowingness is regarded as uncanny; it has a numerous brood, of

which it is fond, and lives by pecking the bark of trees. The

aegolius-owl flies by night, is seldom seen by day; like others we

have mentioned, it lives on cliffs or in caverns; it feeds on two

kinds of food; it has a strong hold on life and is full of resource.

The tree-creeper is a little bird, of fearless disposition; it lives

among trees, feeds on caterpillars, makes a living with ease, and

has a loud clear note. The acanthis finds its food with difficulty;

its plumage is poor, but its note is musical.

                                  18



    Of the herons, the ashen-coloured one, as has been said, unites

with the female not without pain; it is full of resource, carries

its food with it, is eager in the quest of it, and works by day; its

plumage is poor, and its excrement is always wet. Of the other two

species-for there are three in all-the white heron has handsome

plumage, unites without harm to itself with the female, builds a

nest and lays its eggs neatly in trees; it frequents marshes and lakes

and Plains and meadow land. The speckled heron, which is nicknamed

'the skulker', is said in folklore stories to be of servile origin,

and, as its nickname implies, it is the laziest bird of the three

species. Such are the habits of herons. The bird that is called the

poynx has this peculiarity, that it is more prone than any other

bird to peck at the eyes of an assailant or its prey; it is at war

with the harpy, as the two birds live on the same food.

                                  19



    There are two kinds of owsels; the one is black, and is found

everywhere, the other is quite white, about the same size as the

other, and with the same pipe. This latter is found on Cyllene in

Arcadia, and is found nowhere else. The laius, or blue-thrush, is like

the black owsel, only a little smaller; it lives on cliffs or on

tile roofings; it has not a red beak as the black owsel has.

                                  20



    Of thrushes there are three species. One is the misselthrush; it

feeds only on mistletoe and resin; it is about the size of the jay.

A second is the song-thrush; it has a sharp pipe, and is about the

size of the owsel. There is another species called the Illas; it is

the smallest species of the three, and is less variegated in plumage

than the others.

                                  21



    There is a bird that lives on rocks, called the blue-bird from its

colour. It is comparatively common in Nisyros, and is somewhat less

than the owsel and a little bigger than the chaffinch. It has large

claws, and climbs on the face of the rocks. It is steel-blue all over;

its beak is long and slender; its legs are short, like those of the

woodpecker.

                                  22



    The oriole is yellow all over; it is not visible during winter,

but puts in an appearance about the time of the summer solstice, and

departs again at the rising of Arcturus; it is the size of the

turtle-dove. The so-called soft-head (or shrike) always settles on one

and the same branch, where it falls a prey to the birdcatcher. Its

head is big, and composed of gristle; it is a little smaller than

the thrush; its beak is strong, small, and round; it is ashen-coloured

all over; is fleet of foot, but slow of wing. The bird-catcher usually

catches it by help of the owl.

                                  23



    There is also the pardalus. As a rule, it is seen in flocks and

not singly; it is ashen-coloured all over, and about the size of the

birds last described; it is fleet of foot and strong of wing, and

its pipe is loud and high-pitched. The collyrion (or fieldfare)

feeds on the same food as the owsel; is of the same size as the

above mentioned birds; and is trapped usually in the winter. All these

birds are found at all times. Further, there are the birds that live

as a rule in towns, the raven and the crow. These also are visible

at all seasons, never shift their place of abode, and never go into

winter quarters.

                                  24



    Of daws there are three species. One is the chough; it is as large

as the crow, but has a red beak. There is another, called the

'wolf'; and further there is the little daw, called the 'railer'.

There is another kind of daw found in Lybia and Phrygia, which is

web-footed.

                                  25



    Of larks there are two kinds. One lives on the ground and has a

crest on its head; the other is gregarious, and not sporadic like

the first; it is, however, of the same coloured plumage, but is

smaller, and has no crest; it is an article of human food.

                                  26



    The woodcock is caught with nets in gardens. It is about the

size of a barn-door hen; it has a long beak, and in plumage is like

the francolin-partridge. It runs quickly, and is pretty easily

domesticated. The starling is speckled; it is of the same size as

the owsel.

                                  27



    Of the Egyptian ibis there are two kinds, the white and the black.

The white ones are found over Egypt, excepting in Pelusium; the

black ones are found in Pelusium, and nowhere else in Egypt.

                                  28



    Of the little horned owls there are two kinds, and one is

visible at all seasons, and for that reason has the nickname of

'all-the-year-round owl'; it is not sufficiently palatable to come

to table; another species makes its appearance sometimes in the

autumn, is seen for a single day or at the most for two days, and is

regarded as a table delicacy; it scarcely differs from the first

species save only in being fatter; it has no note, but the other

species has. With regard to their origin, nothing is known from ocular

observation; the only fact known for certain is that they are first

seen when a west wind is blowing.

                                  29



    The cuckoo, as has been said elsewhere, makes no nest, but

deposits its eggs in an alien nest, generally in the nest of the

ring-dove, or on the ground in the nest of the hypolais or lark, or on

a tree in the nest of the green linnet. it lays only one egg and

does not hatch it itself, but the mother-bird in whose nest it has

deposited it hatches and rears it; and, as they say, this mother bird,

when the young cuckoo has grown big, thrusts her own brood out of

the nest and lets them perish; others say that this mother-bird

kills her own brood and gives them to the alien to devour, despising

her own young owing to the beauty of the cuckoo. Personal observers

agree in telling most of these stories, but are not in agreement as to

the instruction of the young. Some say that the mother-cuckoo comes

and devours the brood of the rearing mother; others say that the young

cuckoo from its superior size snaps up the food brought before the

smaller brood have a chance, and that in consequence the smaller brood

die of hunger; others say that, by its superior strength, it

actually kills the other ones whilst it is being reared up with

them. The cuckoo shows great sagacity in the disposal of its

progeny; the fact is, the mother cuckoo is quite conscious of her

own cowardice and of the fact that she could never help her young

one in an emergency, and so, for the security of the young one, she

makes of him a supposititious child in an alien nest. The truth is,

this bird is pre-eminent among birds in the way of cowardice; it

allows itself to be pecked at by little birds, and flies away from

their attacks.

                                  30



    It has already been stated that the footless bird, which some term

the cypselus, resembles the swallow; indeed, it is not easy to

distinguish between the two birds, excepting in the fact that the

cypselus has feathers on the shank. These birds rear their young in

long cells made of mud, and furnished with a hole just big enough

for entry and exit; they build under cover of some roofing-under a

rock or in a cavern-for protection against animals and men.

    The so-called goat-sucker lives on mountains; it is a little

larger than the owsel, and less than the cuckoo; it lays two eggs,

or three at the most, and is of a sluggish disposition. It flies up to

the she-goat and sucks its milk, from which habit it derives its name;

it is said that, after it has sucked the teat of the animal, the

teat dries up and the animal goes blind. It is dim-sighted in the

day-time, but sees well enough by night.

                                  31



    In narrow circumscribed districts where the food would be

insufficient for more birds than two, ravens are only found in

isolated pairs; when their young are old enough to fly, the parent

couple first eject them from the nest, and by and by chase them from

the neighbourhood. The raven lays four or five eggs. About the time

when the mercenaries under Medius were slaughtered at Pharsalus, the

districts about Athens and the Peloponnese were left destitute of

ravens, from which it would appear that these birds have some means of

intercommunicating with one another.

                                  32



    Of eagles there are several species. One of them, called 'the

white-tailed eagle', is found on low lands, in groves, and in the

neighbourhood of cities; some call it the 'heron-killer'. It is bold

enough to fly to mountains and the interior of forests. The other

eagles seldom visit groves or low-lying land. There is another species

called the 'plangus'; it ranks second in point of size and strength;

it lives in mountain combes and glens, and by marshy lakes, and goes

by the name of 'duck-killer' and 'swart-eagle.' It is mentioned by

Homer in his account of the visit made by Priam to the tent of

Achilles. There is another species with black Plumage, the smallest

but boldest of all the kinds. It dwells on mountains or in forests,

and is called 'the black-eagle' or 'the hare-killer'; it is the only

eagle that rears its young and thoroughly takes them out with it. It

is swift of flight, is neat and tidy in its habits, too proud for

jealousy, fearless, quarrelsome; it is also silent, for it neither

whimpers nor screams. There is another species, the percnopterus, very

large, with white head, very short wings, long tail-feathers, in

appearance like a vulture. It goes by the name of 'mountain-stork'

or 'half-eagle'. It lives in groves; has all the bad qualities of

the other species, and none of the good ones; for it lets itself be

chased and caught by the raven and the other birds. It is clumsy in

its movements, has difficulty in procuring its food, preys on dead

animals, is always hungry, and at all times whining and screaming.

There is another species, called the 'sea-eagle' or 'osprey'. This

bird has a large thick neck, curved wings, and broad tailfeathers;

it lives near the sea, grasps its prey with its talons, and often,

from inability to carry it, tumbles down into the water. There is

another species called the 'true-bred'; people say that these are

the only true-bred birds to be found, that all other birds-eagles,

hawks, and the smallest birds-are all spoilt by the interbreeding of

different species. The true-bred eagle is the largest of all eagles;

it is larger than the phene; is half as large again as the ordinary

eagle, and has yellow plumage; it is seldom seen, as is the case

with the so-called cymindis. The time for an eagle to be on the wing

in search of prey is from midday to evening; in the morning until

the market-hour it remains on the nest. In old age the upper beak of

the eagle grows gradually longer and more crooked, and the bird dies

eventually of starvation; there is a folklore story that the eagle

is thus punished because it once was a man and refused entertainment

to a stranger. The eagle puts aside its superfluous food for its

young; for owing to the difficulty in procuring food day by day, it at

times may come back to the nest with nothing. If it catch a man

prowling about in the neighbourhood of its nest, it will strike him

with its wings and scratch him with its talons. The nest is built

not on low ground but on an elevated spot, generally on an

inaccessible ledge of a cliff; it does, however, build upon a tree.

The young are fed until they can fly; hereupon the parent-birds topple

them out of the nest, and chase them completely out of the locality.

The fact is that a pair of eagles demands an extensive space for its

maintenance, and consequently cannot allow other birds to quarter

themselves in close neighbourhood. They do not hunt in the vicinity of

their nest, but go to a great distance to find their prey. When the

eagle has captured a beast, it puts it down without attempting to

carry it off at once; if on trial it finds the burden too heavy, it

will leave it. When it has spied a hare, it does not swoop on it at

once, but lets it go on into the open ground; neither does it

descend to the ground at one swoop, but goes gradually down from

higher flights to lower and lower: these devices it adopts by way of

security against the stratagem of the hunter. It alights on high

places by reason of the difficulty it experiences in soaring up from

the level ground; it flies high in the air to have the more

extensive view; from its high flight it is said to be the only bird

that resembles the gods. Birds of prey, as a rule, seldom alight

upon rock, as the crookedness of their talons prevents a stable

footing on hard stone. The eagle hunts hares, fawns, foxes, and in

general all such animals as he can master with ease. It is a

long-lived bird, and this fact might be inferred from the length of

time during which the same nest is maintained in its place.

                                  33



    In Scythia there is found a bird as large as the great bustard.

The female lays two eggs, but does not hatch them, but hides them in

the skin of a hare or fox and leaves them there, and, when it is not

in quest of prey, it keeps a watch on them on a high tree; if any

man tries to climb the tree, it fights and strikes him with its

wing, just as eagles do.

                                  34



    The owl and the night-raven and all the birds see poorly in the

daytime seek their prey in the night, but not all the night through,

but at evening and dawn. Their food consists of mice, lizards, chafers

and the like little creatures. The so-called phene, or lammergeier, is

fond of its young, provides its food with ease, fetches food to its

nest, and is of a kindly disposition. It rears its own young and those

of the eagle as well; for when the eagle ejects its young from the

nest, this bird catches them up as they fall and feeds them. For the

eagle, by the way, ejects the young birds prematurely, before they are

able to feed themselves, or to fly. It appears to do so from jealousy;

for it is by nature jealous, and is so ravenous as to grab furiously

at its food; and when it does grab at its food, it grabs it in large

morsels. It is accordingly jealous of the young birds as they approach

maturity, since they are getting good appetites, and so it scratches

them with its talons. The young birds fight also with one another,

to secure a morsel of food or a comfortable position, whereupon the

mother-bird beats them and ejects them from the nest; the young ones

scream at this treatment, and the phene hearing them catches them as

they fall. The phene has a film over its eyes and sees badly, but

the sea-eagle is very keen-sighted, and before its young are fledged

tries to make them stare at the sun, and beats the one that refuses to

do so, and twists him back in the sun's direction; and if one of

them gets watery eyes in the process, it kills him, and rears the

other. It lives near the sea, and feeds, as has been said, on

sea-birds; when in pursuit of them it catches them one by one,

watching the moment when the bird rises to the surface from its

dive. When a sea-bird, emerging from the water, sees the sea-eagle, he

in terror dives under, intending to rise again elsewhere; the eagle,

however, owing to its keenness of vision, keeps flying after him until

he either drowns the bird or catches him on the surface. The eagle

never attacks these birds when they are in a swarm, for they keep

him off by raising a shower of water-drops with their wings.

                                  35



    The cepphus is caught by means of sea-foam; the bird snaps at

the foam, and consequently fishermen catch it by sluicing with showers

of sea-water. These birds grow to be plump and fat; their flesh has

a good odour, excepting the hinder quarters, which smell of shoreweed.

                                  36



    Of hawks, the strongest is the buzzard; the next in point of

courage is the merlin; and the circus ranks third; other diverse kinds

are the asterias, the pigeon-hawk, and the pternis; the broaded-winged

hawk is called the half-buzzard; others go by the name of

hobby-hawk, or sparrow-hawk, or 'smooth-feathered', or 'toad-catcher'.

Birds of this latter species find their food with very little

difficulty, and flutter along the ground. Some say that there are

ten species of hawks, all differing from one another. One hawk, they

say, will strike and grab the pigeon as it rests on the ground, but

never touch it while it is in flight; another hawk attacks the

pigeon when it is perched upon a tree or any elevation, but never

touches it when it is on the ground or on the wing; other hawks attack

their prey only when it is on the wing. They say that pigeons can

distinguish the various species: so that, when a hawk is an assailant,

if it be one that attacks its prey when the prey is on the wing, the

pigeon will sit still; if it be one that attacks sitting prey, the

pigeon will rise up and fly away.

    In Thrace, in the district sometimes called that of Cedripolis,

men hunt for little birds in the marshes with the aid of hawks. The

men with sticks in their hands go beating at the reeds and brushwood

to frighten the birds out, and the hawks show themselves overhead

and frighten them down. The men then strike them with their sticks and

capture them. They give a portion of their booty to the hawks; that

is, they throw some of the birds up in the air, and the hawks catch

them.

    In the neighbourhood of Lake Maeotis, it is said, wolves act

in concert with the fishermen, and if the fishermen decline to share

with them, they tear their nets in pieces as they lie drying on the

shore of the lake.

                                  37



    So much for the habits of birds.

    In marine creatures, also, one In marine creatures, also, one

may observe many ingenious devices adapted to the circumstances of

their lives. For the accounts commonly given of the so-called

fishing-frog are quite true; as are also those given of the torpedo.

The fishing-frog has a set of filaments that project in front of its

eyes; they are long and thin like hairs, and are round at the tips;

they lie on either side, and are used as baits. Accordingly, when

the animal stirs up a place full of sand and mud and conceals itself

therein, it raises the filaments, and, when the little fish strike

against them, it draws them in underneath into its mouth. The

torpedo narcotizes the creatures that it wants to catch,

overpowering them by the power of shock that is resident in its

body, and feeds upon them; it also hides in the sand and mud, and

catches all the creatures that swim in its way and come under its

narcotizing influence. This phenomenon has been actually observed in

operation. The sting-ray also conceals itself, but not exactly in

the same way. That the creatures get their living by this means is

obvious from the fact that, whereas they are peculiarly inactive, they

are often caught with mullets in their interior, the swiftest of

fishes. Furthermore, the fishing-frog is unusually thin when he is

caught after losing the tips of his filaments, and the torpedo is

known to cause a numbness even in human beings. Again, the hake, the

ray, the flat-fish, and the angelfish burrow in the sand, and after

concealing themselves angle with the filaments on their mouths, that

fishermen call their fishing-rods, and the little creatures on which

they feed swim up to the filaments taking them for bits of sea-weed,

such as they feed upon.

    Wherever an anthias-fish is seen, there will be no dangerous

creatures in the vicinity, and sponge-divers will dive in security,

and they call these signal-fishes 'holy-fish'. It is a sort of

perpetual coincidence, like the fact that wherever snails are

present you may be sure there is neither pig nor partridge in the

neighbourhood; for both pig and partridge eat up the snails.

    The sea-serpent resembles the conger in colour and shape, but is

of lesser bulk and more rapid in its movements. If it be caught and

thrown away, it will bore a hole with its snout and burrow rapidly

in the sand; its snout, by the way, is sharper than that of ordinary

serpents. The so-called sea-scolopendra, after swallowing the hook,

turns itself inside out until it ejects it, and then it again turns

itself outside in. The sea-scolopendra, like the land-scolopendra,

will come to a savoury bait; the creature does not bite with its

teeth, but stings by contact with its entire body, like the

so-called sea-nettle. The so-called fox-shark, when it finds it has

swallowed the hook, tries to get rid of it as the scolopendra does,

but not in the same way; in other words, it runs up the

fishing-line, and bites it off short; it is caught in some districts

in deep and rapid waters, with night-lines.

    The bonitos swarm together when they espy a dangerous

creature, and the largest of them swim round it, and if it touches one

of the shoal they try to repel it; they have strong teeth. Amongst

other large fish, a lamia-shark, after falling in amongst a shoal, has

been seen to be covered with wounds.

    Of river-fish, the male of the sheat-fish is remarkably

attentive to the young. The female after parturition goes away; the

male stays and keeps on guard where the spawn is most abundant,

contenting himself with keeping off all other little fishes that might

steal the spawn or fry, and this he does for forty or fifty days,

until the young are sufficiently grown to make away from the other

fishes for themselves. The fishermen can tell where he is on guard:

for, in warding off the little fishes, he makes a rush in the water

and gives utterance to a kind of muttering noise. He is so earnest

in the performance of his parental duties that the fishermen at times,

if the eggs be attached to the roots of water-plants deep in the

water, drag them into as shallow a place as possible; the male fish

will still keep by the young, and, if it so happen, will be caught

by the hook when snapping at the little fish that come by; if,

however, he be sensible by experience of the danger of the hook, he

will still keep by his charge, and with his extremely strong teeth

will bite the hook in pieces.

    All fishes, both those that wander about and those that are

stationary, occupy the districts where they were born or very

similar places, for their natural food is found there. Carnivorous

fish wander most; and all fish are carnivorous with the exception of a

few, such as the mullet, the saupe, the red mullet, and the chalcis.

The so-called pholis gives out a mucous discharge, which envelops

the creature in a kind of nest. Of shell-fish, and fish that are

finless, the scallop moves with greatest force and to the greatest

distance, impelled along by some internal energy; the murex or

purple-fish, and others that resemble it, move hardly at all. Out of

the lagoon of Pyrrha all the fishes swim in winter-time, except the

sea-gudgeon; they swim out owing to the cold, for the narrow waters

are colder than the outer sea, and on the return of the early summer

they all swim back again. In the lagoon no scarus is found, nor

thritta, nor any other species of the spiny fish, no spotted

dogfish, no spiny dogfish, no sea-crawfish, no octopus either of the

common or the musky kinds, and certain other fish are also absent; but

of fish that are found in the lagoon the white gudgeon is not a marine

fish. Of fishes the oviparous are in their prime in the early summer

until the spawning time; the viviparous in the autumn, as is also

the case with the mullet, the red mullet, and all such fish. In the

neighbourhood of Lesbos, the fishes of the outer sea, or of the

lagoon, bring forth their eggs or young in the lagoon; sexual union

takes place in the autumn, and parturition in the spring. With

fishes of the cartilaginous kind, the males and females swarm together

in the autumn for the sake of sexual union; in the early summer they

come swimming in, and keep apart until after parturition; the two

sexes are often taken linked together in sexual union.

    Of molluscs the sepia is the most cunning, and is the only

species that employs its dark liquid for the sake of concealment as

well as from fear: the octopus and calamary make the discharge

solely from fear. These creatures never discharge the pigment in its

entirety; and after a discharge the pigment accumulates again. The

sepia, as has been said, often uses its colouring pigment for

concealment; it shows itself in front of the pigment and then retreats

back into it; it also hunts with its long tentacles not only little

fishes, but oftentimes even mullets. The octopus is a stupid creature,

for it will approach a man's hand if it be lowered in the water; but

it is neat and thrifty in its habits: that is, it lays up stores in

its nest, and, after eating up all that is eatable, it ejects the

shells and sheaths of crabs and shell-fish, and the skeletons of

little fishes. It seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to

render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it; it does so

also when alarmed. By some the sepia is said to perform the same

trick; that is, they say it can change its colour so as to make it

resemble the colour of its habitat. The only fish that can do this

is the angelfish, that is, it can change its colour like the

octopus. The octopus as a rule does not live the year out. It has a

natural tendency to run off into liquid; for, if beaten and

squeezed, it keeps losing substance and at last disappears. The female

after parturition is peculiarly subject to this colliquefaction; it

becomes stupid; if tossed about by waves, it submits impassively; a

man, if he dived, could catch it with the hand; it gets covered over

with slime, and makes no effort to catch its wonted prey. The male

becomes leathery and clammy. As a proof that they do not live into a

second year there is the fact that, after the birth of the little

octopuses in the late summer or beginning of autumn, it is seldom that

a large-sized octopus is visible, whereas a little before this time of

year the creature is at its largest. After the eggs are laid, they say

that both the male and the female grow so old and feeble that they are

preyed upon by little fish, and with ease dragged from their holes;

and that this could not have been done previously; they say also

that this is not the case with the small and young octopus, but that

the young creature is much stronger than the grown-up one. Neither

does the sepia live into a second year. The octopus is the only

mollusc that ventures on to dry land; it walks by preference on

rough ground; it is firm all over when you squeeze it, excepting in

the neck. So much for the mollusca.

    It is also said that they make a thin rough shell about them

like a hard sheath, and that this is made larger and larger as the

animal grows larger, and that it comes out of the sheath as though out

of a den or dwelling place.

    The nautilus (or argonaut) is a poulpe or octopus, but one

peculiar both in its nature and its habits. It rises up from deep

water and swims on the surface; it rises with its shell down-turned in

order that it may rise the more easily and swim with it empty, but

after reaching the surface it shifts the position of the shell. In

between its feelers it has a certain amount of web-growth,

resembling the substance between the toes of web-footed birds; only

that with these latter the substance is thick, while with the nautilus

it is thin and like a spider's web. It uses this structure, when a

breeze is blowing, for a sail, and lets down some of its feelers

alongside as rudder-oars. If it be frightened it fills its shell

with water and sinks. With regard to the mode of generation and the

growth of the shell knowledge from observation is not yet

satisfactory; the shell, however, does not appear to be there from the

beginning, but to grow in their cases as in that of other

shell-fish; neither is it ascertained for certain whether the animal

can live when stripped of the shell.

                                  38



    Of all insects, one may also say of all living creatures, the most

industrious are the ant, the bee, the hornet, the wasp, and in point

of fact all creatures akin to these; of spiders some are more

skilful and more resourceful than others. The way in which ants work

is open to ordinary observation; how they all march one after the

other when they are engaged in putting away and storing up their food;

all this may be seen, for they carry on their work even during

bright moonlight nights.

                                  39



    Of spiders and phalangia there are many species. Of the venomous

phalangia there are two; one that resembles the so-called wolf-spider,

small, speckled, and tapering to a point; it moves with leaps, from

which habit it is nicknamed 'the flea': the other kind is large, black

in colour, with long front legs; it is heavy in its movements, walks

slowly, is not very strong, and never leaps. (Of all the other species

wherewith poison-vendors supply themselves, some give a weak bite, and

others never bite at all. There is another kind, comprising the

so-called wolf-spiders.) Of these spiders the small one weaves no web,

and the large weaves a rude and poorly built one on the ground or on

dry stone walls. It always builds its web over hollow places inside of

which it keeps a watch on the end-threads, until some creature gets

into the web and begins to struggle, when out the spider pounces.

The speckled kind makes a little shabby web under trees.

    There is a third species of this animal, preeminently clever and

artistic. It first weaves a thread stretching to all the exterior ends

of the future web; then from the centre, which it hits upon with great

accuracy, it stretches the warp; on the warp it puts what

corresponds to the woof, and then weaves the whole together. It sleeps

and stores its food away from the centre, but it is at the centre that

it keeps watch for its prey. Then, when any creature touches the web

and the centre is set in motion, it first ties and wraps the

creature round with threads until it renders it helpless, then lifts

it and carries it off, and, if it happens to be hungry, sucks out

the life-juices--for that is the way it feeds; but, if it be not

hungry, it first mends any damage done and then hastens again to its

quest of prey. If something comes meanwhile into the net, the spider

at first makes for the centre, and then goes back to its entangled

prey as from a fixed starting point. If any one injures a portion of

the web, it recommences weaving at sunrise or at sunset, because it is

chiefly at these periods that creatures are caught in the web. It is

the female that does the weaving and the hunting, but the male takes a

share of the booty captured.

    Of the skilful spiders, weaving a substantial web, there are two

kinds, the larger and the smaller. The one has long legs and keeps

watch while swinging downwards from the web: from its large size it

cannot easily conceal itself, and so it keeps underneath, so that

its prey may not be frightened off, but may strike upon the web's

upper surface; the less awkwardly formed one lies in wait on the

top, using a little hole for a lurking-place. Spiders can spin webs

from the time of their birth, not from their interior as a superfluity

or excretion, as Democritus avers, but off their body as a kind of

tree-bark, like the creatures that shoot out with their hair, as for

instance the porcupine. The creature can attack animals larger than

itself, and enwrap them with its threads: in other words, it will

attack a small lizard, run round and draw threads about its mouth

until it closes the mouth up; then it comes up and bites it.

                                  40



    So much for the spider. Of insects, there is a genus that has no

one name that comprehends all the species, though all the species

are akin to one another in form; it consists of all the insects that

construct a honeycomb: to wit, the bee, and all the insects that

resemble it in form.

    There are nine varieties, of which six are gregarious-the bee, the

king-bee, the drone bee, the annual wasp, and, furthermore, the

anthrene (or hornet), and the tenthredo (or ground-wasp); three are

solitary-the smaller siren, of a dun colour, the larger siren, black

and speckled, and the third, the largest of all, that is called the

humble-bee. Now ants never go a-hunting, but gather up what is ready

to hand; the spider makes nothing, and lays up no store, but simply

goes a-hunting for its food; while the bee--for we shall by and by

treat of the nine varieties--does not go a-hunting, but constructs its

food out of gathered material and stores it away, for honey is the

bee's food. This fact is shown by the beekeepers' attempt to remove

the combs; for the bees, when they are fumigated, and are suffering

great distress from the process, then devour the honey most

ravenously, whereas at other times they are never observed to be so

greedy, but apparently are thrifty and disposed to lay by for their

future sustenance. They have also another food which is called

bee-bread; this is scarcer than honey and has a sweet figlike taste;

this they carry as they do the wax on their legs.

    Very remarkable diversity is observed in their methods of

working and their general habits. When the hive has been delivered

to them clean and empty, they build their waxen cells, bringing in the

juice of all kinds of flowers and the 'tears' or exuding sap of trees,

such as willows and elms and such others as are particularly given

to the exudation of gum. With this material they besmear the

groundwork, to provide against attacks of other creatures; the

bee-keepers call this stuff 'stop-wax'. They also with the same

material narrow by side-building the entrances to the hive if they are

too wide. They first build cells for themselves; then for the

so-called kings and the drones; for themselves they are always

building, for the kings only when the brood of young is numerous,

and cells for the drones they build if a superabundance of honey

should suggest their doing so. They build the royal cells next to

their own, and they are of small bulk; the drones' cells they build

near by, and these latter are less in bulk than the bee's cells.

    They begin building the combs downwards from the top of the

hive, and go down and down building many combs connected together

until they reach the bottom. The cells, both those for the honey and

those also for the grubs, are double-doored; for two cells are

ranged about a single base, one pointing one way and one the other,

after the manner of a double (or hour-glass-shaped) goblet. The

cells that lie at the commencement of the combs and are attached to

the hives, to the extent of two or three concentric circular rows, are

small and devoid of honey; the cells that are well filled with honey

are most thoroughly luted with wax. At the entry to the hive the

aperture of the doorway is smeared with mitys; this substance is a

deep black, and is a sort of dross or residual by-product of wax; it

has a pungent odour, and is a cure for bruises and suppurating

sores. The greasy stuff that comes next is pitch-wax; it has a less

pungent odour and is less medicinal than the mitys. Some say that

the drones construct combs by themselves in the same hive and in the

same comb that they share with the bees; but that they make no

honey, but subsist, they and their grubs also, on the honey made by

the bees. The drones, as a rule, keep inside the hive; when they go

out of doors, they soar up in the air in a stream, whirling round

and round in a kind of gymnastic exercise; when this is over, they

come inside the hive and feed to repletion ravenously. The kings never

quit the hive, except in conjunction with the entire swarm, either for

food or for any other reason. They say that, if a young swarm go

astray, it will turn back upon its route and by the aid of scent

seek out its leader. It is said that if he is unable to fly he is

carried by the swarm, and that if he dies the swarm perishes; and

that, if this swarm outlives the king for a while and constructs

combs, no honey is produced and the bees soon die out.

    Bees scramble up the stalks of flowers and rapidly gather the

bees-wax with their front legs; the front legs wipe it off on to the

middle legs, and these pass it on to the hollow curves of the

hind-legs; when thus laden, they fly away home, and one may see

plainly that their load is a heavy one. On each expedition the bee

does not fly from a flower of one kind to a flower of another, but

flies from one violet, say, to another violet, and never meddles

with another flower until it has got back to the hive; on reaching the

hive they throw off their load, and each bee on his return is

accompanied by three or four companions. One cannot well tell what

is the substance they gather, nor the exact process of their work.

Their mode of gathering wax has been observed on olive-trees, as owing

to the thickness of the leaves the bees remain stationary for a

considerable while. After this work is over, they attend to the grubs.

There is nothing to prevent grubs, honey, and drones being all found

in one and the same comb. As long as the leader is alive, the drones

are said to be produced apart by themselves; if he be no longer

living, they are said to be reared by the bees in their own cells, and

under these circumstances to become more spirited: for this reason

they are called 'sting-drones', not that they really have stings,

but that they have the wish without the power, to use such weapons.

The cells for the drones are larger than the others; sometimes the

bees construct cells for the drones apart, but usually they put them

in amongst their own; and when this is the case the bee-keepers cut

the drone-cells out of the combs.

    There are several species of bees, as has been said; two of

'kings', the better kind red, the other black and variegated, and

twice as big as the working-bee. The best workingbee is small,

round, and speckled: another kind is long and like an anthrene wasp;

another kind is what is called the robber-bee, black and flat-bellied;

then there is the drone, the largest of all, but devoid of sting,

and lazy. There is a difference between the progeny of bees that

inhabit cultivated land and of those from the mountains: the

forest-bees are more shaggy, smaller, more industrious and more

fierce. Working-bees make their combs all even, with the superficial

covering quite smooth. Each comb is of one kind only: that is, it

contains either bees only, or grubs only, or drones only; if it

happen, however, that they make in one and the same comb all these

kinds of cells, each separate kind will be built in a continuous row

right through. The long bees build uneven combs, with the lids of

the cells protuberant, like those of the anthrene; grubs and

everything else have no fixed places, but are put anywhere; from these

bees come inferior kings, a large quantity of drones, and the

so-called robber-bee; they produce either no honey at all, or honey in

very small quantities. Bees brood over the combs and so mature them;

if they fail to do so, the combs are said to go bad and to get covered

with a sort of spider's web. If they can keep brooding over the part

undamaged, the damaged part simply eats itself away; if they cannot so

brood, the entire comb perishes; in the damaged combs small worms

are engendered, which take on wings and fly away. When the combs

keep settling down, the bees restore the level surface, and put

props underneath the combs to give themselves free passage-room; for

if such free passage be lacking they cannot brood, and the cobwebs

come on. When the robber-bee and the drone appear, not only do they do

no work themselves, but they actually damage the work of the other

bees; if they are caught in the act, they are killed by the

working-bees. These bees also kill without mercy most of their

kings, and especially kings of the inferior sort; and this they do for

fear a multiplicity of kings should lead to a dismemberment of the

hive. They kill them especially when the hive is deficient in grubs,

and a swarm is not intended to take place; under these circumstances

they destroy the cells of the kings if they have been prepared, on the

ground that these kings are always ready to lead out swarms. They

destroy also the combs of the drones if a failure in the supply be

threatening and the hive runs short of provisions; under such

circumstances they fight desperately with all who try to take their

honey, and eject from the hive all the resident drones; and oftentimes

the drones are to be seen sitting apart in the hive. The little bees

fight vigorously with the long kind, and try to banish them from the

hives; if they succeed, the hive will be unusually productive, but

if the bigger bees get left mistresses of the field they pass the time

in idleness, and no good at all but die out before the autumn.

Whenever the working-bees kill an enemy they try to do so out of

doors; and whenever one of their own body dies, they carry the dead

bee out of doors also. The so-called robber-bees spoil their own

combs, and, if they can do so unnoticed, enter and spoil the combs

of other bees; if they are caught in the act they are put to death. It

is no easy task for them to escape detection, for there are

sentinels on guard at every entry; and, even if they do escape

detection on entering, afterwards from a surfeit of food they cannot

fly, but go rolling about in front of the hive, so that their

chances of escape are small indeed. The kings are never themselves

seen outside the hive except with a swarm in flight: during which time

all the other bees cluster around them. When the flight of a swarm

is imminent, a monotonous and quite peculiar sound made by all the

bees is heard for several days, and for two or three days in advance a

few bees are seen flying round the hive; it has never as yet been

ascertained, owing to the difficulty of the observation, whether or no

the king is among these. When they have swarmed, they fly away and

separate off to each of the kings; if a small swarm happens to

settle near to a large one, it will shift to join this large one,

and if the king whom they have abandoned follows them, they put him to

death. So much for the quitting of the hive and the swarmflight.

Separate detachments of bees are told off for diverse operations; that

is, some carry flower-produce, others carry water, others smooth and

arrange the combs. A bee carries water when it is rearing grubs. No

bee ever settles on the flesh of any creature, or ever eats animal

food. They have no fixed date for commencing work; but when their

provender is forthcoming and they are in comfortable trim, and by

preference in summer, they set to work, and when the weather is fine

they work incessantly.

    The bee, when quite young and in fact only three days old, after

shedding its chrysalis-case, begins to work if it be well fed. When

a swarm is settling, some bees detach themselves in search of food and

return back to the swarm. In hives that are in good condition the

production of young bees is discontinued only for the forty days

that follow the winter solstice. When the grubs are grown, the bees

put food beside them and cover them with a coating of wax; and, as

soon as the grub is strong enough, he of his own accord breaks the lid

and comes out. Creatures that make their appearance in hives and spoil

the combs the working-bees clear out, but the other bees from sheer

laziness look with indifference on damage done to their produce.

When the bee-masters take out the combs, they leave enough food behind

for winter use; if it be sufficient in quantity, the occupants of

the hive will survive; if it be insufficient, then, if the weather

be rough, they die on the spot, but if it be fair, they fly away and

desert the hive. They feed on honey summer and winter; but they

store up another article of food resembling wax in hardness, which

by some is called sandarace, or bee-bread. Their worst enemies are

wasps and the birds named titmice, and furthermore the swallow and the

bee-eater. The frogs in the marsh also catch them if they come in

their way by the water-side, and for this reason bee-keepers chase the

frogs from the ponds from which the bees take water; they destroy also

wasps' nests, and the nests of swallows, in the neighbourhood of the

hives, and also the nests of bee-eaters. Bees have fear only of one

another. They fight with one another and with wasps. Away from the

hive they attack neither their own species nor any other creature, but

in the close proximity of the hive they kill whatever they get hold

of. Bees that sting die from their inability to extract the sting

without at the same time extracting their intestines. True, they often

recover, if the person stung takes the trouble to press the sting out;

but once it loses its sting the bee must die. They can kill with their

stings even large animals; in fact, a horse has been known to have

been stung to death by them. The kings are the least disposed to

show anger or to inflict a sting. Bees that die are removed from the

hive, and in every way the creature is remarkable for its cleanly

habits; in point of fact, they often fly away to a distance to void

their excrement because it is malodorous; and, as has been said,

they are annoyed by all bad smells and by the scent of perfumes, so

much so that they sting people that use perfumes.

    They perish from a number of accidental causes, and when their

kings become too numerous and try each to carry away a portion of

the swarm.

    The toad also feeds on bees; he comes to the doorway of the

hive, puffs himself out as he sits on the watch, and devours the

creatures as they come flying out; the bees can in no way retaliate,

but the bee-keeper makes a point of killing him.

    As for the class of bee that has been spoken of as inferior or

good-for-nothing, and as constructing its combs so roughly, some

bee-keepers say that it is the young bees that act so from

inexperience; and the bees of the current year are termed young. The

young bees do not sting as the others do; and it is for this reason

that swarms may be safely carried, as it is of young bees that they

are composed. When honey runs short they expel the drones, and the

bee-keepers supply the bees with figs and sweet-tasting articles of

food. The elder bees do the indoor work, and are rough and hairy

from staying indoors; the young bees do the outer carrying, and are

comparatively smooth. They kill the drones also when in their work

they are confined for room; the drones, by the way, live in the

innermost recess of the hive. On one occasion, when a hive was in a

poor condition, some of the occupants assailed a foreign hive; proving

victorious in a combat they took to carrying off the honey; when the

bee-keeper tried to kill them, the other bees came out and tried to

beat off the enemy but made no attempt to sting the man.

    The diseases that chiefly attack prosperous hives are first of all

the clerus-this consists in a growth of little worms on the floor,

from which, as they develop, a kind of cobweb grows over the entire

hive, and the combs decay; another diseased condition is indicated

in a lassitude on the part of the bees and in malodorousness of the

hive. Bees feed on thyme; and the white thyme is better than the

red. In summer the place for the hive should be cool, and in winter

warm. They are very apt to fall sick if the plant they are at work

on be mildewed. In a high wind they carry a stone by way of ballast to

steady them. If a stream be near at hand, they drink from it and

from it only, but before they drink they first deposit their load;

if there be no water near at hand, they disgorge their honey as they

drink elsewhere, and at once make off to work. There are two seasons

for making honey, spring and autumn; the spring honey is sweeter,

whiter, and in every way better than the autumn honey. Superior

honey comes from fresh comb, and from young shoots; the red honey is

inferior, and owes its inferiority to the comb in which it is

deposited, just as wine is apt to be spoiled by its cask;

consequently, one should have it looked to and dried. When the thyme

is in flower and the comb is full, the honey does not harden. The

honey that is golden in hue is excellent. White honey does not come

from thyme pure and simple; it is good as a salve for sore eyes and

wounds. Poor honey always floats on the surface and should be

skimmed off; the fine clear honey rests below. When the floral world

is in full bloom, then they make wax; consequently you must then

take the wax out of the hive, for they go to work on new wax at

once. The flowers from which they gather honey are as follows: the

spindle-tree, the melilot-clover, king's-spear, myrtle,

flowering-reed, withy, and broom. When they work at thyme, they mix in

water before sealing up the comb. As has been already stated, they all

either fly to a distance to discharge their excrement or make the

discharge into one single comb. The little bees, as has been said, are

more industrious than the big ones; their wings are battered; their

colour is black, and they have a burnt-up aspect. Gaudy and showy

bees, like gaudy and showy women, are good-for-nothings.

    Bees seem to take a pleasure in listening to a rattling noise; and

consequently men say that they can muster them into a hive by rattling

with crockery or stones; it is uncertain, however, whether or no

they can hear the noise at all and also whether their procedure is due

to pleasure or alarm. They expel from the hive all idlers and

unthrifts. As has been said, they differentiate their work; some

make wax, some make honey, some make bee-bread, some shape and mould

combs, some bring water to the cells and mingle it with the honey,

some engage in out-of-door work. At early dawn they make no noise,

until some one particular bee makes a buzzing noise two or three times

and thereby awakes the rest; hereupon they all fly in a body to

work. By and by they return and at first are noisy; then the noise

gradually decreases, until at last some one bee flies round about,

making a buzzing noise, and apparently calling on the others to go

to sleep; then all of a sudden there is a dead silence.

    The hive is known to be in good condition if the noise heard

within it is loud, and if the bees make a flutter as they go out and

in; for at this time they are constructing brood-cells. They suffer

most from hunger when they recommence work after winter. They become

somewhat lazy if the bee-keeper, in robbing the hive, leave behind too

much honey; still one should leave cells numerous in proportion to the

population, for the bees work in a spiritless way if too few combs are

left. They become idle also, as being dispirited, if the hive be too

big. A hive yields to the bee-keeper six or nine pints of honey; a

prosperous hive will yield twelve or fifteen pints, exceptionally good

hives eighteen. Sheep and, as has been said, wasps are enemies to

the bees. Bee-keepers entrap the latter, by putting a flat dish on the

ground with pieces of meat on it; when a number of the wasps settle on

it, they cover them with a lid and put the dish and its contents on

the fire. It is a good thing to have a few drones in a hive, as

their presence increases the industry of the workers. Bees can tell

the approach of rough weather or of rain; and the proof is that they

will not fly away, but even while it is as yet fine they go fluttering

about within a restricted space, and the bee-keeper knows from this

that they are expecting bad weather. When the bees inside the hive

hang clustering to one another, it is a sign that the swarm is

intending to quit; consequently, occasion, when a bee-keepers, on

seeing this, besprinkle the hive with sweet wine. It is advisable to

plant about the hives pear-trees, beans, Median-grass, Syrian-grass,

yellow pulse, myrtle, poppies, creeping-thyme, and almond-trees.

Some bee-keepers sprinkle their bees with flour, and can distinguish

them from others when they are at work out of doors. If the spring

be late, or if there be drought or blight, then grubs are all the

fewer in the hives. So much for the habits of bees.

                                  41



    Of wasps, there are two kinds. Of these kinds one is wild and

scarce, lives on the mountains, engenders grubs not underground but on

oak-trees, is larger, longer, and blacker than the other kind, is

invariably speckled and furnished with a sting, and is remarkably

courageous. The pain from its sting is more severe than that caused by

the others, for the instrument that causes the pain is larger, in

proportion to its own larger size. These wild live over into a

second year, and in winter time, when oaks have been in course of

felling, they may be seen coming out and flying away. They lie

concealed during the winter, and live in the interior of logs of wood.

Some of them are mother-wasps and some are workers, as with the

tamer kind; but it is by observation of the tame wasps that one may

learn the varied characteristics of the mothers and the workers. For

in the case of the tame wasps also there are two kinds; one consists

of leaders, who are called mothers, and the other of workers. The

leaders are far larger and milder-tempered than the others. The

workers do not live over into a second year, but all die when winter

comes on; and this can be proved, for at the commencement of winter

the workers become drowsy, and about the time of the winter solstice

they are never seen at all. The leaders, the so-called mothers, are

seen all through the winter, and live in holes underground; for men

when ploughing or digging in winter have often come upon mother-wasps,

but never upon workers. The mode of reproduction of wasps is as

follows. At the approach of summer, when the leaders have found a

sheltered spot, they take to moulding their combs, and construct the

so-called sphecons,-little nests containing four cells or thereabouts,

and in these are produced working-wasps but not mothers. When these

are grown up, then they construct other larger combs upon the first,

and then again in like manner others; so that by the close of autumn

there are numerous large combs in which the leader, the so-called

mother, engenders no longer working-wasps but mothers. These develop

high up in the nest as large grubs, in cells that occur in groups of

four or rather more, pretty much in the same way as we have seen the

grubs of the king-bees to be produced in their cells. After the

birth of the working-grubs in the cells, the leaders do nothing and

the workers have to supply them with nourishment; and this is inferred

from the fact that the leaders (of the working-wasps) no longer fly

out at this time, but rest quietly indoors. Whether the leaders of

last year after engendering new leaders are killed by the new brood,

and whether this occurs invariably or whether they can live for a

longer time, has not been ascertained by actual observation; neither

can we speak with certainty, as from observation, as to the age

attained by the mother-wasp or by the wild wasps, or as to any other

similar phenomenon. The mother-wasp is broad and heavy, fatter and

larger than the ordinary wasp, and from its weight not very strong

on the wing; these wasps cannot fly far, and for this reason they

always rest inside the nest, building and managing its indoor

arrangements. The so-called mother-wasps are found in most of the

nests; it is a matter of doubt whether or no they are provided with

stings; in all probability, like the king-bees, they have stings,

but never protrude them for offence. Of the ordinary wasps some are

destitute of stings, like the drone-bees, and some are provided with

them. Those unprovided therewith are smaller and less spirited and

never fight, while the others are big and courageous; and these

latter, by some, are called males, and the stingless, females. At

the approach of winter many of the wasps that have stings appear to

lose them; but we have never met an eyewitness of this phenomenon.

Wasps are more abundant in times of drought and in wild localities.

They live underground; their combs they mould out of chips and

earth, each comb from a single origin, like a kind of root. They

feed on certain flowers and fruits, but for the most part on animal

food. Some of the tame wasps have been observed when sexually

united, but it was not determined whether both, or neither, had

stings, or whether one had a sting and the other had not; wild wasps

have been seen under similar circumstances, when one was seen to

have a sting but the case of the other was left undetermined. The

wasp-grub does not appear to come into existence by parturition, for

at the outset the grub is too big to be the offspring of a wasp. If

you take a wasp by the feet and let him buzz with the vibration of his

wings, wasps that have no stings will fly toward it, and wasps that

have stings will not; from which fact it is inferred by some that

one set are males and the other females. In holes in the ground in

winter-time wasps are found, some with stings, and some without.

Some build cells, small and few in number; others build many and large

ones. The so-called mothers are caught at the change of season, mostly

on elm-trees, while gathering a substance sticky and gumlike. A

large number of mother-wasps are found when in the previous year wasps

have been numerous and the weather rainy; they are captured in

precipitous places, or in vertical clefts in the ground, and they

all appear to be furnished with stings.

                                  42



    So much for the habits of wasps.

    Anthrenae do not subsist by culling from flowers as bees do, but

for the most part on animal food: for this reason they hover about

dung; for they chase the large flies, and after catching them lop

off their heads and fly away with the rest of the carcases; they are

furthermore fond of sweet fruits. Such is their food. They have also

kings or leaders like bees and wasps; and their leaders are larger

in proportion to themselves than are wasp-kings to wasps or

bee-kings to bees. The anthrena-king, like the wasp-king, lives

indoors. Anthrenae build their nests underground, scraping out the

soil like ants; for neither anthrenae nor wasps go off in swarms as

bees do, but successive layers of young anthrenae keep to the same

habitat, and go on enlarging their nest by scraping out more and

more of soil. The nest accordingly attains a great size; in fact, from

a particularly prosperous nest have been removed three and even four

baskets full of combs. They do not, like bees, store up food, but pass

the winter in a torpid condition; the greater part of them die in

the winter, but it is uncertain whether that can be said of them

all, In the hives of bees several kings are found and they lead off

detachments in swarms, but in the anthrena's nest only one king is

found. When individual anthrenae have strayed from their nest, they

cluster on a tree and construct combs, as may be often seen

above-ground, and in this nest they produce a king; when the king is

full-grown, he leads them away and settles them along with himself

in a hive or nest. With regard to their sexual unions, and the

method of their reproduction, nothing is known from actual

observation. Among bees both the drones and the kings are stingless,

and so are certain wasps, as has been said; but anthrenae appear to be

all furnished with stings: though, by the way, it would well be

worth while to carry out investigation as to whether the anthrena-king

has a sting or not.

                                  43



    Humble-bees produce their young under a stone, right on the

ground, in a couple of cells or little more; in these cells is found

an attempt at honey, of a poor description. The tenthredon is like the

anthrena, but speckled, and about as broad as a bee. Being epicures as

to their food, they fly, one at a time, into kitchens and on to slices

of fish and the like dainties. The tenthredon brings forth, like the

wasp, underground, and is very prolific; its nest is much bigger and

longer than that of the wasp. So much for the methods of working and

the habits of life of the bee, the wasp, and all the other similar

insects.

                                  44



    As regards the disposition or temper of animals, as has been

previously observed, one may detect great differences in respect to

courage and timidity, as also, even among wild animals, in regard to

tameness and wildness. The lion, while he is eating, is most

ferocious; but when he is not hungry and has had a good meal, he is

quite gentle. He is totally devoid of suspicion or nervous fear, is

fond of romping with animals that have been reared along with him

and to whom he is accustomed, and manifests great affection towards

them. In the chase, as long as he is in view, he makes no attempt to

run and shows no fear, but even if he be compelled by the multitude of

the hunters to retreat, he withdraws deliberately, step by step, every

now and then turning his head to regard his pursuers. If, however,

he reach wooded cover, then he runs at full speed, until he comes to

open ground, when he resumes his leisurely retreat. When, in the open,

he is forced by the number of the hunters to run while in full view,

he does run at the top of his speed, but without leaping and bounding.

This running of his is evenly and continuously kept up like the

running of a dog; but when he is in pursuit of his prey and is close

behind, he makes a sudden pounce upon it. The two statements made

regarding him are quite true; the one that he is especially afraid

of fire, as Homer pictures him in the line-'and glowing torches,

which, though fierce he dreads,'-and the other, that he keeps a steady

eye upon the hunter who hits him, and flings himself upon him. If a

hunter hit him, without hurting him, then if with a bound he gets hold

of him, he will do him no harm, not even with his claws, but after

shaking him and giving him a fright will let him go again. They invade

the cattle-folds and attack human beings when they are grown old and

so by reason of old age and the diseased condition of their teeth

are unable to pursue their wonted prey. They live to a good old age.

The lion who was captured when lame, had a number of his teeth broken;

which fact was regarded by some as a proof of the longevity of

lions, as he could hardly have been reduced to this condition except

at an advanced age. There are two species of lions, the plump,

curly-maned, and the long-bodied, straight maned; the latter kind is

courageous, and the former comparatively timid; sometimes they run

away with their tail between their legs, like a dog. A lion was once

seen to be on the point of attacking a boar, but to run away when

the boar stiffened his bristles in defence. It is susceptible of

hurt from a wound in the flank, but on any other part of its frame

will endure any number of blows, and its head is especially hard.

Whenever it inflicts a wound, either by its teeth or its claws,

there flows from the wounded parts suppurating matter, quite yellow,

and not to be stanched by bandage or sponge; the treatment for such

a wound is the same as that for the bite of a dog.

    The thos, or civet, is fond of man's company; it does him no

harm and is not much afraid of him, but it is an enemy to the dog

and the lion, and consequently is not found in the same habitat with

them. The little ones are the best. Some say that there are two

species of the animal, and some say, three; there are probably not

more than three, but, as is the case with certain of the fishes,

birds, and quadrupeds, this animal changes in appearance with the

change of season. His colour in winter is not the same as it is in

summer; in summer the animal is smooth-haired, in winter he is clothed

in fur.

                                  45



    The bison is found in Paeonia on Mount Messapium, which

separates Paeonia from Maedica; and the Paeonians call it the monapos.

It is the size of a bull, but stouter in build, and not long in the

body; its skin, stretched tight on a frame, would give sitting room

for seven people. In general it resembles the ox in appearance, except

that it has a mane that reaches down to the point of the shoulder,

as that of the horse reaches down to its withers; but the hair in

its mane is softer than the hair in the horse's mane, and clings

more closely. The colour of the hair is brown-yellow; the mane reaches

down to the eyes, and is deep and thick. The colour of the body is

half red, half ashen-grey, like that of the so-called chestnut

horse, but rougher. It has an undercoat of woolly hair. The animal

is not found either very black or very red. It has the bellow of a

bull. Its horns are crooked, turned inwards towards each other and

useless for purposes of self-defence; they are a span broad, or a

little more, and in volume each horn would hold about three pints of

liquid; the black colour of the horn is beautiful and bright. The tuft

of hair on the forehead reaches down to the eyes, so that the animal

sees objects on either flank better than objects right in front. It

has no upper teeth, as is the case also with kine and all other horned

animals. Its legs are hairy; it is cloven-footed, and the tail,

which resembles that of the ox, seems not big enough for the size of

its body. It tosses up dust and scoops out the ground with its hooves,

like the bull. Its skin is impervious to blows. Owing to the savour of

its flesh it is sought for in the chase. When it is wounded it runs

away, and stops only when thoroughly exhausted. It defends itself

against an assailant by kicking and projecting its excrement to a

distance of eight yards; this device it can easily adopt over and over

again, and the excrement is so pungent that the hair of hunting-dogs

is burnt off by it. It is only when the animal is disturbed or alarmed

that the dung has this property; when the animal is undisturbed it has

no blistering effect. So much for the shape and habits of the

animal. When the season comes for parturition the mothers give birth

to their young in troops upon the mountains. Before dropping their

young they scatter their dung in all directions, making a kind of

circular rampart around them; for the animal has the faculty of

ejecting excrement in most extraordinary quantities.

                                  46



    Of all wild animals the most easily tamed and the gentlest is

the elephant. It can be taught a number of tricks, the drift and

meaning of which it understands; as, for instance, it can taught to

kneel in presence of the king. It is very sensitive, and possessed

of an intelligence superior to that of other animals. When the male

has had sexual union with the female, and the female has conceived,

the male has no further intercourse with her.

    Some say that the elephant lives for two hundred years;

others, for one hundred and twenty; that the female lives nearly as

long as the male; that they reach their prime about the age of

sixty, and that they are sensitive to inclement weather and frost. The

elephant is found by the banks of rivers, but he is not a river

animal; he can make his way through water, as long as the tip of his

trunk can be above the surface, for he blows with his trunk and

breathes through it. The animal is a poor swimmer owing to the heavy

weight of his body.

                                  47



    The male camel declines intercourse with its mother; if his keeper

tries compulsion, he evinces disinclination. On one occasion, when

intercourse was being declined by the young male, the keeper covered

over the mother and put the young male to her; but, when after the

intercourse the wrapping had been removed, though the operation was

completed and could not be revoked, still by and by he bit his

keeper to death. A story goes that the king of Scythia had a

highly-bred mare, and that all her foals were splendid; that wishing

to mate the best of the young males with the mother, he had him

brought to the stall for the purpose; that the young horse declined;

that, after the mother's head had been concealed in a wrapper he, in

ignorance, had intercourse; and that, when immediately afterwards

the wrapper was removed and the head of the mare was rendered visible,

the young horse ran way and hurled himself down a precipice.

                                  48



    Among the sea-fishes many stories are told about the dolphin,

indicative of his gentle and kindly nature, and of manifestations of

passionate attachment to boys, in and about Tarentum, Caria, and other

places. The story goes that, after a dolphin had been caught and

wounded off the coast of Caria, a shoal of dolphins came into the

harbour and stopped there until the fisherman let his captive go free;

whereupon the shoal departed. A shoal of young dolphins is always,

by way of protection, followed by a large one. On one occasion a shoal

of dolphins, large and small, was seen, and two dolphins at a little

distance appeared swimming in underneath a little dead dolphin when it

was sinking, and supporting it on their backs, trying out of

compassion to prevent its being devoured by some predaceous fish.

Incredible stories are told regarding the rapidity of movement of this

creature. It appears to be the fleetest of all animals, marine and

terrestrial, and it can leap over the masts of large vessels. This

speed is chiefly manifested when they are pursuing a fish for food;

then, if the fish endeavours to escape, they pursue him in their

ravenous hunger down to deep waters; but, when the necessary return

swim is getting too long, they hold in their breath, as though

calculating the length of it, and then draw themselves together for an

effort and shoot up like arrows, trying to make the long ascent

rapidly in order to breathe, and in the effort they spring right

over the a ship's masts if a ship be in the vicinity. This same

phenomenon is observed in divers, when they have plunged into deep

water; that is, they pull themselves together and rise with a speed

proportional to their strength. Dolphins live together in pairs,

male and female. It is not known for what reason they run themselves

aground on dry land; at all events, it is said that they do so at

times, and for no obvious reason.

                                  49



    Just as with all animals a change of action follows a change

of circumstance, so also a change of character follows a change of

action, and often some portions of the physical frame undergo a

change, occurs in the case of birds. Hens, for instance, when they

have beaten the cock in a fight, will crow like the cock and endeavour

to tread him; the crest rises up on their head and the tail-feathers

on the rump, so that it becomes difficult to recognize that they are

hens; in some cases there is a growth of small spurs. On the death

of a hen a cock has been seen to undertake the maternal duties,

leading the chickens about and providing them with food, and so intent

upon these duties as to cease crowing and indulging his sexual

propensities. Some cock-birds are congenitally so feminine that they

will submit patiently to other males who attempt to tread them.

                                  50



    Some animals change their form and character, not only at

certain ages and at certain seasons, but in consequence of being

castrated; and all animals possessed of testicles may be submitted

to this operation. Birds have their testicles inside, and oviparous

quadrupeds close to the loins; and of viviparous animals that walk

some have them inside, and most have them outside, but all have them

at the lower end of the belly. Birds are castrated at the rump at

the part where the two sexes unite in copulation. If you burn this

twice or thrice with hot irons, then, if the bird be full-grown, his

crest grows sallow, he ceases to crow, and foregoes sexual passion;

but if you cauterize the bird when young, none of these male

attributes propensities will come to him as he grows up. The case is

the same with men: if you mutilate them in boyhood, the

later-growing hair never comes, and the voice never changes but

remains high-pitched; if they be mutilated in early manhood, the

late growths of hair quit them except the growth on the groin, and

that diminishes but does not entirely depart. The congenital growths

of hair never fall out, for a eunuch never grows bald. In the case

of all castrated or mutilated male quadrupeds the voice changes to the

feminine voice. All other quadrupeds when castrated, unless the

operation be performed when they are young, invariably die; but in the

case of boars, and in their case only, the age at which the

operation is performed produces no difference. All animals, if

operated on when they are young, become bigger and better looking than

their unmutilated fellows; if they be mutilated when full-grown,

they do not take on any increase of size. If stags be mutilated, when,

by reason of their age, they have as yet no horns, they never grow

horns at all; if they be mutilated when they have horns, the horns

remain unchanged in size, and the animal does not lose them. Calves

are mutilated when a year old; otherwise, they turn out uglier and

smaller. Steers are mutilated in the following way: they turn the

animal over on its back, cut a little off the scrotum at the lower

end, and squeeze out the testicles, then push back the roots of them

as far as they can, and stop up the incision with hair to give an

outlet to suppurating matter; if inflammation ensues, they cauterize

the scrotum and put on a plaster. If a full-grown bull be mutilated,

he can still to all appearance unite sexually with the cow. The

ovaries of sows are excised with the view of quenching in them

sexual appetites and of stimulating growth in size and fatness. The

sow has first to be kept two days without food, and, after being

hung up by the hind legs, it is operated on; they cut the lower belly,

about the place where the boars have their testicles, for it is

there that the ovary grows, adhering to the two divisions (or horns)

of the womb; they cut off a little piece and stitch up the incision.

Female camels are mutilated when they are wanted for war purposes, and

are mutilated to prevent their being got with young. Some of the

inhabitants of Upper Asia have as many as three thousand camels:

when they run, they run, in consequence of the length of their stride,

much quicker than the horses of Nisaea. As a general rule, mutilated

animals grow to a greater length than the unmutilated.

    All animals that ruminate derive profit and pleasure from the

process of rumination, as they do from the process of eating. It is

the animals that lack the upper teeth that ruminate, such as kine,

sheep, and goats. In the case of wild animals no observation has

been possible; save in the case of animals that are occasionally

domesticated, such as the stag, and it, we know, chews the cud. All

animals that ruminate generally do so when lying down on the ground.

They carry on the process to the greatest extent in winter, and

stall-fed ruminants carry it on for about seven months in the year;

beasts that go in herds, as they get their food out of doors, ruminate

to a lesser degree and over a lesser period. Some, also, of the

animals that have teeth in both jaws ruminate; as, for instance, the

Pontic mice, and the fish which from the habit is by some called

'the Ruminant', (as well as other fish).

    Long-limbed animals have loose faeces, and broad-chested animals

vomit with comparative facility, and these remarks are, in a general

way, applicable to quadrupeds, birds, and men.

                                 49B



    A considerable number of birds change according to season the

colour of their plumage and their note; as, for instance, the owsel

becomes yellow instead of black, and its note gets altered, for in

summer it has a musical note and in winter a discordant chatter. The

thrush also changes its colour; about the throat it is marked in

winter with speckles like a starling, in summer distinctly spotted:

however, it never alters its note. The nightingale, when the hills are

taking on verdure, sings continually for fifteen days and fifteen

nights; afterwards it sings, but not continuously. As summer

advances it has a different song, not so varied as before, nor so

deep, nor so intricately modulated, but simple; it also changes its

colour, and in Italy about this season it goes by a different name. It

goes into hiding, and is consequently visible only for a brief period.

 The erithacus (or redbreast) and the so-called redstart change into

one another; the former is a winter bird, the latter a summer one, and

the difference between them is practically limited to the coloration

of their plumage. In the same way with the beccafico and the blackcap;

these change into one another. The beccafico appears about autumn, and

the blackcap as soon as autumn has ended. These birds, also, differ

from one another only in colour and note; that these birds, two in

name, are one in reality is proved by the fact that at the period when

the change is in progress each one has been seen with the change as

yet incomplete. It is not so very strange that in these cases there is

a change in note and in plumage, for even the ring-dove ceases to

coo in winter, and recommences cooing when spring comes in; in winter,

however, when fine weather has succeeded to very stormy weather,

this bird has been known to give its cooing note, to the

astonishment of such as were acquainted with its usual winter silence.

As a general rule, birds sing most loudly and most diversely in the

pairing season. The cuckoo changes its colour, and its note is not

clearly heard for a short time previous to its departure. It departs

about the rising of the Dog-star, and it reappears from springtime

to the rising of the Dog-star. At the rise of this star the bird

called by some oenanthe disappears, and reappears when it is

setting: thus keeping clear at one time of extreme cold, and at

another time of extreme heat. The hoopoe also changes its colour and

appearance, as Aeschylus has represented in the following lines:-



          The Hoopoe, witness to his own distress,

          Is clad by Zeus in variable dress:-

          Now a gay mountain-bird, with knightly crest,

          Now in the white hawk's silver plumage drest,

          For, timely changing, on the hawk's white wing

          He greets the apparition of the Spring.

          Thus twofold form and colour are conferred,

          In youth and age, upon the selfsame bird.

          The spangled raiment marks his youthful days,

          The argent his maturity displays;

          And when the fields are yellow with ripe corn

          Again his particoloured plumes are worn.

          But evermore, in sullen discontent,

          He seeks the lonely hills, in self-sought banishment.



    Of birds, some take a dust-bath by rolling in dust, some take

a water-bath, and some take neither the one bath nor the other.

Birds that do not fly but keep on the ground take the dust-bath, as

for instance the hen, the partridge, the francolin, the crested

lark, the pheasant; some of the straight-taloned birds, and such as

live on the banks of a river, in marshes, or by the sea, take a

water-bath; some birds take both the dust-bath and the waterbath, as

for instance the pigeon and the sparrow; of the crooked-taloned

birds the greater part take neither the one bath nor the other. So

much for the ways of the above-mentioned, but some birds have a

peculiar habit of making a noise at their hinder quarters, as, for

instance, the turtle-dove; and they make a violent movement of their

tails at the same time that they produce this peculiar sound.





                                -THE END-

