




The Principles of Economics


by Alfred Marshall





Book II



Some Fundamental Notions





Chapter 1



Introductory



    1. We have seen that economics is, on the one side, a Science

of Wealth; and, on the other, that part of the Social Science of

man's action in society, which deals with his Efforts to satisfy

his Wants, in so far as the efforts and wants are capable of

being measured in terms of wealth, or its general representative,

i.e. money. We shall be occupied during the greater part of this

volume with these wants and efforts; and with the causes by which

the prices that measure the wants are brought into equilibrium

with those that measure the efforts. For this purpose we shall

have to study in Book III wealth in relation to the diversity of

man's wants, which it has to satisfy; and in Book IV wealth in

relation to the diversity of man's efforts by which it is

produced.

    But in the present Book, we have to inquire which of all the

things that are the result of man's efforts, and are capable of

satisfying man's wants, are to be counted as Wealth; and into

what groups or classes these are to be divided. For there is a

compact group of terms connected with Wealth itself, and with

Capital, the study of each of which throws light on the others;

while the study of the whole together is a direct continuation,

and in some respects a completion, of that inquiry as to the

scope and methods of economics on which we have just been

engaged. And, therefore, instead of taking what may seem the more

natural course of starting with an analysis of wants, and of

wealth in direct relation to them, it seems on the whole best to

deal with this group of terms at once.

    In doing this we shall of course have to take some account of

the variety of wants and efforts; but we shall not want to assume

anything that is not obvious and a matter of common knowledge.

The real difficulty of our task lies in another direction; being

the result of the need under which economics, alone among

sciences, lies of making shift with a few terms in common use to

express a great number of subtle distinctions.

    2. As Mill says:(1*) - "The ends of scientific classification

are best answered when the obj ects are formed into groups

respecting which a greater number of general propositions can be

made, and those propositions more important, than those which

could be made respecting any other groups into which the same

things could be distributed." But we meet at starting with the

difficulty that those propositions which are the most important

in one stage of economic development, are not unlikely to be

among the least important in another, if indeed they apply at

all.

    In this matter economists have much to learn from the recent

experiences of biology: and Darwin's profound discussion of the

question(2*) throws a strong light on the difficulties before us.

He points out that those parts of the structure which determine

the habits of life and the general place of each being in the

economy of nature, are as a rule not those which throw most light

on its origin, but those which throw least. The qualities which a

breeder or a gardener notices as eminently adapted to enable an

animal or a plant to thrive in its environment, are for that very

reason likely to have been developed in comparatively recent

times. And in like manner those properties of an economic

institution which play the most important part in fitting it for

the work which it has to do now, are for that very reason likely

to be in a great measure of recent growth.

    Instances are found in many of the relations between employer

and employed, between middleman and producer, between bankers and

their two classes of clients, those from whom they borrow and

those to whom they lend. The substitution of the term "interest"

for "usury" corresponds to a general change in the character of

loans, which has given an entirely new key-note to our analysis

and classification of the different elements into which the cost

of production of a commodity may be resolved. Again, the general

scheme of division of labour into skilled and unskilled is

undergoing a gradual change; the scope of the term "rent" is

being broadened in some directions and narrowed in others; and so

on.

    But on the other hand we must keep constantly in mind the

history of the terms which we use. For, to begin with, this

history is important for its own sake; and because it throws side

lights on the history of the economic development of society. And

further, even if the sole purpose of our study of economics were

to obtain knowledge that would guide us in the attainment of

immediate practical ends, we should yet be bound to keep our use

of terms as much as possible in harmony with the traditions of

the past; in order that we might be quick to perceive the

indirect hints and the subtle and subdued warnings, which the

experiences of our ancestors offer for our instruction.

    3. Our task is difficult. In physical sciences indeed,

whenever it is seen that a group of things have a certain set of

qualities in common, and will often be spoken of together, they

are formed into a class with a special name; and as soon as a new

notion emerges, a new technical term is invented to represent it.

But economics cannot venture to follow this example. Its

reasonings must be expressed in language that is intelligible to

the general public; it must therefore endeavour to conform itself

to the familiar terms of everyday life, and so far as possible

must use them as they are commonly used.

    In common use almost every word has many shades of meaning,

and therefore needs to be interpreted by the context. And, as

Bagehot has pointed out, even the most formal writers on economic

science are compelled to follow this course; for otherwise they

would not have enough words at their disposal. But unfortunately

they do not always avow that they are taking this freedom;

sometimes perhaps they are scarcely even aware of the fact

themselves. The bold and rigid definitions, with which their

expositions of the science begin, lull the reader into a false

security. Not being warned that he must often look to the context

for a special interpretation clause, he ascribes to what he reads

a meaning different from that which the writers had in their own

minds; and perhaps misinterprets them and accuses them of folly

of which they had not been guilty.(3*)

    Again, most of the chief distinctions marked by economic

terms are differences not of kind but of degree. At first sight

they appear to be differences of kind, and to have sharp outlines

which can be clearly marked out; but a more careful study has

shown that there is no real breach of continuity. It is a

remarkable fact that the progress of economics has discovered

hardly any new real differences in kind, while it is continually

resolving apparent differences in kind into differences in

degree. We shall meet with many instances of the evil that may be

done by attempting to draw broad, hard and fast lines of

division, and to formulate definite propositions with regard to

differences between things which nature has not separated by any

such lines.

    4. We must then analyze carefully the real characteristics of

the various things with which we have to deal; and we shall thus

generally find that there is some use of each term which has

distinctly greater claims than any other to be called its leading

use, on the ground that it represents a distinction that is more

important for the purposes of modern science than any other that

is in harmony with ordinary usage. This may be laid down as the

meaning to be given to the term whenever nothing to the contrary

is stated or implied by the context. When the term is wanted to

be used in any other sense, whether broader or narrower, the

change must be indicated.

    Even among the most careful thinkers there will always remain

differences of opinion as to the exact places in which some at

least of the lines of definition should be drawn. The questions

at issue must in general be solved by judgments as to the

practical convenience of different courses; and such judgments

cannot always be established or overthrown by scientific

reasoning: there must remain a margin of debatable ground. But

there is no such margin in the analysis itself: if two people

differ with regard to that, they cannot both be right. And the

progress of the science may be expected gradually to establish

this analysis on an impregnable basis.(4*)



NOTES:



1. Logic, Bk. IV, ch. VII, Par. 2.



2. Origin of Species, ch. XIV.



3. We ought "to write more as we do in common life, where the

context is a sort of unexpressed 'interpretation clause'; only as

in Political Economy we have more difficult things to speak of

than in ordinary conversation, we must take more care, give more

warning of any change; and at times write out 'the interpretation

clause' for that page or discussion lest there should be any

mistake. I know that this is difficult and delicate work; and all

that I have to say in defence of it is that in practice it is

safer than the competing plan of inflexible definitions. Any one

who tries to express various meanings on complex things with a

scanty vocabulary of fastened senses, will find that his style

grows cumbrous without being accurate, that he has to Use long

periphrases for common thoughts, and that after all he does not

come out right, for he is half the time falling back into the

senses which fit the case in hand best, and these are sometimes

one, sometimes another, and almost always different from his

'hard and fast' sense. In such discussions we should learn to

vary our definitions as we want, just as we say 'let x, y, z,

mean' now this, and now that, in different problems; and this,

though they do not always avow it, is really the practice of the

clearest and most effective writers." (Bagehot's Postulates of

English Political Economy, pp. 78-9.) Cairnes also (Logical

Method of Political Economy, Lect. VI) combats "the assumption

that the attribute on which a definition turns ought to be one

which does not admit of degrees"; and argues that "to admit of

degrees is the character of all natural facts."



4. When it is wanted to narrow the meaning of a term (that is, in

logical language, to diminish its extension by increasing its

intension), a qualifying adjective will generally suffice, but a

change in the opposite direction cannot as a rule be so simply

made. Contests as to definitions are often of this kind: - A and

B are qualities common to a great number of things, many of these

things have in addition the quality C, and again many the quality

D, whilst some have both C and D. It may then be argued that on

the whole it will be best to define a term so as to include all

things which have the qualities A and B, or only those which have

the qualities A, B, C, or only those which have the qualities A,

B, D; or only those which have A, B, C, D. The decision between

these various courses must rest on considerations of practical

convenience, and is a matter of far less importance than a

careful study of the qualities A, B, C, D, and of their mutual

relations. But unfortunately this study has occupied a much

smaller space in English economics than controversies as to

definitions; which have indeed occasionally led indirectly to the

discovery of scientific truth, but always by roundabout routes,

and with much waste of time and labour.



Chapter 2



Wealth



1. All wealth consists of desirable things; that is, things which

satisfy human wants directly or indirectly: but not all desirable

things are reckoned as wealth. The affection of friends, for

instance, is an important element of wellbeing, but it is not

reckoned as wealth, except by a poetic licence. Let us then begin

by classifying desirable things, and then consider which of them

should be accounted as elements of wealth.

    In the absence of any short term in common use to represent

all desirable things, or things that satisfy human wants, we may

use the term Goods for that purpose.

    Desirable things or goods are Material, or Personal and

Immaterial. Material goods consist of useful material things, and

of all rights to hold, or use, or derive benefits from material

things, or to receive them at a future time. Thus they include

the physical gifts of nature, land and water, air and climate;

the products of agriculture, mining, fishing, and manufacture;

buildings, machinery, and implements; mortgages and other bonds;

shares in public and private companies, all kinds of monopolies,

patent-rights, copyrights; also rights of way and other rights of

usage. Lastly, opportunities of travel, access to good scenery,

museums, etc. are the embodiment of material facilities, external

to a man; though the faculty of appreciating them is internal and

personal.

    A man's non-material goods fall into two classes. One

consists of his own qualities and faculties for action and for

enjoyment; such for instance as business ability, professional

skill, or the faculty of deriving recreation from reading or

music. All these lie within himself and are called internal. The

second class are called external because they consist of

relations beneficial to him with other people. Such, for

instance, were the labour dues and personal services of various

kinds which the ruling classes used to require from their serfs

and other dependents. But these have passed away; and the chief

instances of such relations beneficial to their owner now-a-days

are to be found in the good will and business connection of

traders and professional men.(1*)

    Again, goods may be transferable or non-transferable. Among

the latter are to be classed a person's qualities and faculties

for action and enjoyment (i.e. his internal goods); also such

part of his business connection as depends on personal trust in

him and cannot be transferred, as part of his vendible good will;

also the advantages of climate, light, air, and his privileges of

citizenship and rights and opportunities of making use of public

property.(2*)

    Those goods are free, which are not appropriated and are

afforded by Nature without requiring the effort of man. The land

in its original state was a free gift of nature. But in settled

countries it is not a free good from the point of view of the

individual. Wood is still free in some Brazilian forests. The

fish of the sea are free generally: but some sea fisheries are

jealously guarded for the exclusive use of members of a certain

nation, and may be classed as national property. Oyster beds that

have been planted by man are not free in any sense; those that

have grown naturally are free in every sense if they are not

appropriated; if they are private property they are still free

gifts from the point of view of the nation. But, since the nation

has allowed its rights in them to become vested in private

persons, they are not free from the point of view of the

individual; and the same is true of private rights of fishing in

rivers. But wheat grown on free land and the fish that have been

landed from free fisheries are not free: for they have been

acquired by labour.

    2. We may now pass to the question which classes of a man's

goods are to be reckoned as part of his wealth. The question is

one as to which there is some difference of opinion, but the

balance of argument as well as of authority seems clearly to

incline in favour of the following answer.

    When a man's wealth is spoken of simply, and without any

interpretation clause in the context, it is to be taken to be his

stock of two classes of goods.

    In the first class are those material goods to which he has

(by law or custom) private rights of property, and which are

therefore transferable and exchangeable. These it will be

remembered include not only such things as land and houses,

furniture and machinery, and other material things which may be

in his single private ownership, but also any shares in public

companies, debenture bonds, mortgages and other obligations which

he may hold requiring others to pay money or goods to him. On the

other hand, the debts which he owes to others may be regarded as

negative wealth; and they must be subtracted from his gross

possessions before his true net wealth can be found.

    Services and other goods, which pass out of existence in the

same instant that they come into it, are, of course, not part of

the stock of wealth.(3*)

    In the second class are those immaterial goods which belong

to him, are external to him, and serve directly as the means of

enabling him to acquire material goods. Thus it excludes all his

own personal qualities and faculties, even those which enable him

to earn his living; because they are internal. And it excludes

his personal friendships, in so far as they have no direct

business value. But it includes his business and professional

connections, the organization of his business, and - where such

things exist - his property in slaves, in labour dues, etc.

    This use of the term Wealth is in harmony with the usage of

ordinary life: and, at the same time, it includes those goods,

and only those, which come clearly within the scope of economic

science, as defined in Book I; and which may therefore be called

economic goods. For it includes all those things, external to a

man, which (i) belong to him, and do not belong equally to his

neighbours, and therefore are distinctly his; and which (ii) are

directly capable of a money measure, - a measure that represents

on the one side the efforts and sacrifices by which they have

been called into existence, and, on the other, the wants which

they satisfy.(4*)

    3. A broader view of wealth may indeed be taken for some

purposes; but then recourse must be had to a special

interpretation clause, to prevent confusion. Thus, for instance,

the carpenter's skill is as direct a means of enabling him to

satisfy other people's material wants, and therefore indirectly

his own, as are the tools in his work-basket; and perhaps it may

be convenient to have a term which will include it as part of

wealth in a broader use. Pursuing the lines indicated by Adam

Smith,(5*) and followed by most continental economists, we may

define personal wealth so as to include all those energies,

faculties, and habits which directly contribute to making people

industrially efficient; together with those business connections

and associations of any kind, which we have already reckoned as

part of wealth in the narrower use of the term. Industrial

faculties have a further claim to be regarded as economic in the

fact that their value is as a rule capable of some sort of

indirect measurement.(6*)

    The question whether it is ever worth while to speak of them

as wealth is merely one of convenience, though it has been much

discussed as if it were one of principle.

    Confusion would certainly be caused by using the term

"wealth" by itself when we desire to include a person's

industrial qualities. "Wealth" simply should always mean external

wealth only. But little harm, and some good seems likely to arise

from the occasional use of the phrase " material and personal

wealth."

    4. But we still have to take account of those material goods

which are common to him with his neighbours; and which therefore

it would be a needless trouble to mention when comparing his

wealth with theirs; though they may be important for some

purposes, and especially for comparisons between the economic

conditions of distant places or distant times.

    These goods consist of the benefits which he derives from

living in a certain place at a certain time, and being a member

of a certain state or community; they include civil and military

security, and the right and opportunity to make use of public

property and institutions of all kinds, such as roads, gaslight,

etc., and rights to justice or to a free education. The townsman

and the countryman have each of them for nothing many advantages

which the other either cannot get at all, or can get only at

great expense. Other things being equal, one person has more real

wealth in its broadest sense than another, if the place in which

the former lives has a better climate, better roads, better

water, more wholesome drainage; and again better newspapers,

books, and places of amusement and instruction. House-room, food

and clothing, which would be insufficient in a cold climate, may

be abundant in a warm climate: on the other hand, that warmth

which lessens men's physical needs, and makes them rich with but

a slight provision of material wealth, makes them poor in the

energy that procures wealth.

    Many of these things are collective goods. i.e. goods, which

are not in private ownership. And this brings us to consider

wealth from the social, as opposed to the individual point of

view.

    5. Let us then look at those elements of the wealth of a

nation which are commonly ignored when estimating the wealth of

the individuals composing it. The most obvious forms of such

wealth are public material property of all kinds, such as roads

and canals, buildings and parks, gasworks and waterworks; though

unfortunately many of them have been secured not by public

savings, but by public borrowings, and there is the heavy

"negative" wealth of a large debt to be set against them.

    But the Thames has added more to the wealth of England than

all its canals, and perhaps even than all its railroads. And

though the Thames is a free gift of nature (except in so far as

its navigation has been improved), while the canal is the work of

man, yet we ought for many purposes to reckon the Thames a part

of England's wealth.

    German economists often lay stress on the non-material

elements of national wealth; and it is right to do this in some

problems relating to national wealth, but not in all. Scientific

knowledge indeed, wherever discovered, soon becomes the property

of the whole civilized world, and may be considered as

cosmopolitan rather than as specially national wealth. The same

is true of mechanical inventions and of many other improvements

in the arts of production; and it is true of music. But those

kinds of literature which lose their force by translation, may be

regarded as in a special sense the wealth of those nations in

whose language they are written. And the organization of a free

and well-ordered State is to be regarded for some purposes as an

important element of national wealth.

    But national wealth includes the individual as well as the

collective property of its members. And in estimating the

aggregate sum of their individual wealth, we may save some

trouble by omitting all debts and other obligations due to one

member of a nation from another. For instance, so far as the

English national debt and the bonds of an English railway are

owned within the nation, we can adopt the simple plan of counting

the railway itself as part of the national wealth, and neglecting

railway and government bonds altogether. But we still have to

deduct for those bonds etc. issued by the English Government or

by private Englishmen, and held by foreigners; and to add for

those foreign bonds etc. held by Englishmen.(7*)

    Cosmopolitan wealth differs from national wealth much as that

differs from individual wealth. In reckoning it, debts due from

members of one nation to those of another may conveniently be

omitted from both sides of the account. Again, just as rivers are

important elements of national wealth, the ocean is one of the

most valuable properties of the world. The notion of cosmopolitan

wealth is indeed nothing more than that of national wealth

extended over the whole area of the globe.

    Individual and national rights to wealth rest on the basis of

civil and international law, or at least of custom that has the

force of law. An exhaustive investigation of the economic

conditions of any time and place requires therefore an inquiry

into law and custom; and economics owes much to those who have

worked in this direction. But its boundaries are already wide;

and the historical and juridical bases of the conceptions of

property are vast subj ects which may best be discussed in

separate treatises.

    6. The notion of Value is intimately connected with that of

Wealth; and a little may be said about it here. "The word value"

says Adam Smith "has two different meanings, and sometimes

expresses the utility of some particular object and sometimes the

power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that

object conveys." But experience has shown that it is not well to

use the word in the former sense.

    The value, that is the exchange value, of one thing in terms

of another at any place and time, is the amount of that second

thing which can be got there and then in exchange for the first.

Thus the term value is relative, and expresses the relation

between two things at a particular place and time.

    Civilized countries generally adopt gold or silver or both as

money. Instead of expressing the values of lead and tin, and

wood, and corn and other things in terms of one another, we

express them in terms of money in the first instance; and call

the value of each thing thus expressed its price. If we know that

a ton of lead will exchange for fifteen sovereigns at any place

and time, while a ton of tin will exchange for ninety sovereigns,

we say that their prices then and there are ?5 and ?0

respectively, and we know that the value of a ton of tin in terms

of lead is six tons then and there.

    The price of every thing rises and falls from time to time

and place to place; and with every such change the purchasing

power of money changes so far as that thing goes. If the

purchasing power of money rises with regard to some things, and

at the same time falls equally with regard to equally important

things, its general purchasing power (or its power of purchasing

things in general) has remained stationary. This phrase conceals

some difficulties, which we must study later on. But meanwhile we

may take it in its popular sense, which is sufficiently clear and

we may throughout this volume neglect possible changes in the

general purchasing power of money. Thus the price of anything

will be taken as representative of its exchange value relatively

to things in general, or in other words as representative of its

general purchasing power.(8*)

    But if inventions have increased man's power over nature very

much, then the real value of money is better measured for some

purposes in labour than in commodities. This difficulty however

will not much affect our work in the present volume, which is

only a study of the "Foundations" of economics.



NOTES:



1. For, in the words in which Hermann begins his masterly

analysis of wealth, "Some Goods are internal, others external, to

the individual. An internal good is that which he finds in

himself given to him by nature, or which he educates in himself

by his own free action, such as muscular strength, health, mental

attainments. Everything that the outer world offers for the

satisfaction of his wants is an external good to him."



2. The above classification of goods may be expressed thus:

        Goods are: 1. external a. material i. transferable

                                          ii. non-transferable

                               b. personal i. transferable

                                          ii. non-transferable

                   2. internal-personal-non-transferable



Another arrangement is more convenient for some purposes:

        Goods are: 1. material-external i. transferable

                                       ii. non-transferable

                   2. personal a. external i. transferable

                                          ii. non-transferable

                               b. internal-non-transferable





3. That part of the value of the share in a trading company which

is due to the personal reputation and connection of those who

conduct its affairs ought properly to come under the next head as

external personal goods. But this point is not of much practical

importance.



4. It is not implied that the owner of transferable goods, if he

transferred them, could always realize the whole money value,

which they have for him. A well-fitting coat, for instance, may

be worth the price charged for it by an expensive tailor to its

owner, because he wants it and cannot get it made for less: but

he could not sell it for half that sum. The successful financier

who has spent ?0,000 on having a house and grounds made to suit

his own special fancy, is from one point of view right in

reckoning them in the inventory of his property at their cost

price: but, should he fail, they will not form an asset to his

creditors of anything like that value.

    And in the same way from one point of view we may count the

business connection of the solicitor or physician, the merchant

or the manufacturer, at the full equivalent of the income he

would lose if he were deprived of it; while yet we must recognize

that its exchange value, i.e. the value which he could get for it

by selling it, is much less than that.



5. Comp. Wealth of Nations, Bk. II, ch. II.



6. "The bodies of men are without doubt the most valuable

treasure of a country," said Davenant in the seventeenth century;

and similar phrases hve been common whenever the trend of

political developments has made men anxious that the populations

should increase fast.



7. The value of a business may be to some extent due to its

having a monopoly, either a complete monopoly, secured perhaps by

a patent; or a partial monopoly, owing to its wares being better

known than others which are really equally good; and in so far as

this is the case the business does not add to the real wealth of

the nation. If the monopoly were broken down, the diminution of

national wealth due to the disappearance of its value would

generally be more than made up, partly by the increased value of

rival businesses, and partly by the increased purchasing power of

the money representing the Wealth of other members of the

community. (It should, however, be added that in some exceptional

cases, the price of a commodity may be lowered in consequence of

its production being monopolized: but such cases are very rare,

and may be neglected for the present.)

    Again, business connections and trade reputations add to the

national wealth, only in so far as they bring purchasers into

relation with those producers who will meet their real wants most

fully for a given price; or in other words, only in so far as

they increase the extent to which the efforts of the community as

a whole meet the wants of the community as a whole. Nevertheless

when we are estimating national wealth, not directly but

indirectly as the aggregate of individual wealth, we must allow

for these businesses at their full value, even though this partly

consists of a monopoly which is not used for the public benefit.

For the injury they do to rival producers was allowed for in

counting up the values of the businesses of those rivals; and the

injury done to consumers by raising the price of the produce,

which they buy, was allowed for in reckoning the purchasing power

of their means, so far as this particular commodity is concerned.

    A special case of this is the organization of credit. It

increases the efficiency of production in the country, and thus

adds to national wealth. And the power of obtaining credit is a

valuable asset to any individual trader. If, however, any

accident should drive him out of business, the injury to national

wealth is something less than the whole value of that asset;

because some part at least of the business, which he would have

done, will now be done by others with the aid of some part at

least of the capital which he would have borrowed.

    There are similar difficulties as to how far money is to be

reckoned as part of national wealth; but to treat them thoroughly

would require us to anticipate a good deal of the theory of

money.



8. As Cournot points out (Principes Mathematiques de la Theorie

des Richesses, ch. II), we get the same sort of convenience from

assuming the existence of a standard of uniform purchasing power

by which to measure value, that astronomers do by assuming that

there is a "mean sun" which crosses the meridian at uniform

intervals, so that the clock can keep pace with it; whereas the

actual sun crosses the meridian sometimes before and sometimes

after noon as shown by the clock.



Chapter 3



Production, Consumption, Labour, Necessaries



    1. Man cannot create material things. In the mental and moral

world indeed he may produce new ideas; but when he is said to

produce material things, he really only produces utilities; or in

other words, his efforts and sacrifices result in changing the

form or arrangement of matter to adapt it better for the

satisfaction of wants. All that he can do in the physical world

is either to readjust matter so as to make it more useful, as

when he makes a log of wood into a table; or to put it in the way

of being made more useful by nature, as when he puts seed where

the forces of nature will make it burst out into life.(1*)

    It is sometimes said that traders do not produce: that while

the cabinet-maker produces furniture, the furnituredealer merely

sells what is already produced. But there is no scientific

foundation for this distinction. They both produce utilities, and

neither of them can do more: the furniture-dealer moves and

rearranges matter so as to make it more serviceable than it was

before, and the carpenter does nothing more. The sailor or the

railway-man who carries coal above ground produces it, just as

much as the miner who carries it underground; the dealer in fish

helps to move on fish from where it is of comparatively little

use to where it is of greater use, and the fisherman does no

more. It is true that there are often more traders than are

necessary; and that, whenever that is the case, there is a waste.

But there is also waste if there are two men to a plough which

can be well worked by one man; in both cases all those who are at

work produce, though they may produce but little. Some writers

have revived the medieval attacks on trade on the ground that it

does not produce. But they have not aimed at the right mark. They

should have attacked the imperfect organization of trade,

particularly of retail trade.(2*)

    Consumption may be regarded as negative production. Just as

man can produce only utilities, so he can consume nothing more.

He can produce services and other immaterial products, and he can

consume them. But as his production of material products is

really nothing more than a rearrangement of matter which gives it

new utilities; so his consumption of them is nothing more than a

disarrangement of matter, which diminishes or destroys its

utilities. Often indeed when he is said to consume things, he

does nothing more than to hold them for his use, while, as Senior

says, they "are destroyed by those numerous gradual agents which

we call collectively time".(3*) As the "producer" of wheat is he

who puts seed where nature will make it grow, so the "consumer"

of pictures, of curtains, and even of a house or a yacht does

little to wear them out himself; but he uses them while time

wastes them.

    Another distinction to which some prominence has been given,

but which is vague and perhaps not of much practical use, is that

between consumers' goods (called also consumption goods, or again

goods of the first order), such as food, clothes, etc., which

satisfy wants directly on the one hand; and, on the other hand,

producers' goods (called also production goods, or again

instrumental, or again intermediate goods), such as ploughs and

looms and raw cotton, which satisfy wants indirectly by

contributing towards the production of the first class of

goods.(4*)

    2. All labour is directed towards producing some effect. For

though some exertions are taken merely for their own sake, as

when a game is played for amusement, they are not counted as

labour. We may define labour as any exertion of mind or body

undergone partly or wholly with a view to some good other than

the pleasure derived directly from the work.(5*) And if we had to

make a fresh start it would be best to regard all labour as

productive except that which failed to promote the aim towards

which it was directed, and so produced no utility. But in all the

many changes which the meaning of the word " productive,, has

undergone, it has had special reference to stored-up wealth, to

the comparative neglect and sometimes even to the exclusion of

immediate and transitory enjoyment;(6*) and an almost unbroken

tradition compels us to regard the central notion of the word as

relating to the provision for the wants of the future rather than

those of the present. It is true that all wholesome enjoyments,

whether luxurious or not, are legitimate ends of action both

public and private; and it is true that the enjoyment of luxuries

affords an incentive to exertion, and promotes progress in many

ways. But if the efficiency and energy of industry are the same,

the true interest of a country is generally advanced by the

subordination of the desire for transient luxuries to the

attainment of those more solid and lasting resources which will

assist industry in its future work, and will in various ways tend

to make life larger. This general idea has been in solution, as

it were, in all stages of economic theory; and has been

precipitated by different writers into various hard and fast

distinctions by which certain trades have been marked off as

productive and certain others as unproductive.

    For instance, many writers even of recent times have adhered

to Adam Smith's plan of classing domestic servants as

unproductive. There is doubtless in many large houses a

superabundance of servants, some of whose energies might with

advantage to the community be transferred to other. uses. but the

same is true of the greater part of those who earn their

livelihood by distilling whisky; and yet no economist has

proposed to call them unproductive. There is no distinction in

character between the work of the baker who provides bread for a

family, and that of the cook who boils potatoes. If the baker

should be a confectioner, or fancy baker, it is probable that he

spends at least as much of his time as the domestic cook does, on

labour that is unproductive in the popular sense of providing

unnecessary enj oyments.

    Whenever we use the word Productive by itself, it is to be

understood to mean productive of the means of production, and of

durable sources of enjoyment. But it is a slippery term, and

should not be used where precision is needed.(7*)

    If ever we want to use it in a different sense, we must say

so: for instance we may speak of labour as productive of

necessaries, etc.

    Productive consumption, when employed as a technical term, is

commonly defined as the use of wealth in the production of

further wealth; and it should properly include not all the

consumption of productive workers, but only that which is

necessary for their efficiency. The term may perhaps be useful in

studies of the accumulation of material wealth. But it is apt to

mislead. For consumption is the end of production; and all

wholesome consumption is productive of benefits, many of the most

worthy of which do not directly contribute to the production of

material wealth.(8*)

    3. This brings us to consider the term Necessaries. It is

common to distinguish necessaries, comforts, and luxuries; the

first class including all things required to meet wants which

must be satisfied, while the latter consist of things that meet

wants of a less urgent character. But here again there is a

troublesome ambiguity. When we say that a want must be satisfied,

what are the consequences which we have in view if it is not

satisfied? Do they include death? Or do they extend only to the

loss of strength and vigour? In other words, are necessaries the

things which are necessary for life, or those which are necessary

for efficiency?

    The term Necessaries, like the term Productive, has been used

elliptically, the subject to which it refers being left to be

supplied by the reader; and since the implied subject has varied,

the reader has often supplied one which the writer did not

intend, and thus misunderstood his drift. In this, as in the

preceding case, the chief source of confusion can be removed by

supplying explicitly in every critical place that which the

reader is intended to undsertand.

    The older use of the term Necessaries was limited to those

things which were sufficient to enable the labourers, taken one

with another, to support themselves and their families. Adam

Smith and the more careful of his followers observed indeed

variations in the standard of comfort and "decency"; and they

recognized that differences of climate and differences of custom

make things necessary in some cases, which are superfluous in

others.(9*) But Adam Smith was influenced by reasonings of the

Physiocrats: they were based on the condition ofthe French people

in the eighteenth century, most of whom had no notion of any

necessaries beyond those which were required for mere existence.

In happier times, however, a more careful analysis has made it

evident that there is for each rank of industry, at any time and

place, a more or less clearly defined income which is necessary

for merely sustaining its members; while there is another and

larger income which is necessary for keeping it in full

efficiency.(10*)

    It may be true that the wages of any industrial class might

have sufficed to maintain a higher efficiency, if they had been

spent with perfect wisdom. But every estimate of necessaries must

be relative to a given place and time; and unless there be a

special interpretation clause to the contrary, it may be assumed

that the wages will be spent with just that amount of wisdom,

forethought, and unselfishness, which prevails in fact among the

industrial class under discussion. With this understanding we may

say that the income of any class in the ranks of industry is

below its necessary level, when any increase in their income

would in the course of time produce a more than proportionate

increase in their efficiency. Consumption may be economized by a

change of habits, but any stinting of necessaries is

wasteful.(11*)

    4. Some detailed study of the necessaries for efficiency of

different classes of workers will have to be made, when we come

to inquire into the causes that determine the supply of efficient

labour. But it will serve to give some definiteness to our ideas,

if we consider here what are the necessaries for the efficiency

of an ordinary agricultural or of an unskilled town labourer and

his family, in England, in this generation. They may be said to

consist of a well-drained dwelling with several rooms, warm

clothing, with some changes of underclothing, pure water, a

plentiful supply of cereal food, with a moderate allowance of

meat and milk, and a little tea, etc., some education and some

recreation, and lastly, sufficient freedom for his wife from

other work to enable her to perform properly her maternal and her

household duties. If in any district unskilled labour is deprived

of any of these things, its efficiency will suffer in the same

way as that of a horse that is not properly tended, or a

steam-engine that has an inadequate supply of coals. All

consumption up to this limit is strictly productive consumption:

any stinting of this consumption is not economical, but wasteful.

    In addition, perhaps, some consumption of alcohol and

tobacco, and some indulgence in fashionable dress are in many

places so habitual, that they may be said to be conventionally

necessary, since in order to obtain them the average man and

woman will sacrifice some things which are necessary for

efficiency. Their wages are therefore less than are practically

necessary for efficiency, unless they provide not only for what

is strictly necessary consumption, but include also a certain

amount of conventional necessaries.(12*)

    The consumption of conventional necessaries by productive

workers is commonly classed as productive consumption; but

strictly speaking it ought not to be; and in critical passages a

special interpretation clause should be added to say whether or

not they are included.

    It should however be noticed that many things which are

rightly described as superfluous luxuries, do yet, to some

extent, take the place of necessaries; and to that extent their

consumption is productive when they are consumed by

producers.(13*)



NOTES:



1. Bacon, Novum Organon IV, says "Ad opera nil aliud potest homo

quam ut corpora naturalia admoveat et amoveat, reliqua natura

intus agit" (quoted by Bonar, Philosophy and Political Economy,

p. 249).



2. Production, in the narrow sense, changes the form and nature

of products. Trade and transport change their external relations.



3. Political Economy, p. 54. Senior would like to substitute the

verb "to use" for the verb "to consume."



4. Thus flour to be made into a cake when already in the house of

the consumer, is treated by some as a consumers' good; while not

only the flour, but the cake itself is treated as a producers'

good when in the hand of the confectioner. Carl Menger

(Volkswirtschaftslehre, ch. I, 2) says bread belongs to the first

order, flour to the second, a flour mill to the third order and

so on. It appears that if a railway train carries people on a

pleasure excursion, also some tins of biscuits, and milling

machinery and some machinery that is used for making milling

machinery; then the train is at one and the same time a good of

the first, second, third and fourth orders.



5. This is Jevons' definition (Theory of Political Economy, ch.

v), except that he includes only painful exertions. But he

himself points out how painful idleness often is. Most people

work more than they would if they considered only the direct

pleasure resulting from the work; but in a healthy state,

pleasure predominates over pain in a great part even of the work

that is done for hire. Of course the definition is elastic; an

agricultural labourer working in his garden in the evening thinks

chiefly of the fruit of his labours; a mechanic returning home

after a day of sedentary toil finds positive pleasure in his

garden work, but he too cares a good deal about the fruit of his

labour; while a rich man working in like manner, though he may

take a pride in doing it well, will probably care little for any

pecuniary saving that he effects by it.



6. Thus the Mercantilists who regarded the precious metals;

partly because they were imperishable, as wealth in a fuller

sense than anything else, regarded as unproductive or "sterile"

all labour that was not directed to producing goods for

exportation in exchange for gold and silver. The Physiocrats

thought all labour sterile which consumed an equal value to that

which it produced; and regarded the agriculturist as the only

productive worker, because his labour alone (as they thought)

left behind it a net surplus of stored-up wealth. Adam Smith

softened down the Physiocratic definition; but still he

considered that agricultural labour was more productive than any

other. His followers discarded this distinction; but they have

generally adhered, though with many differences in points of

detail, to the notion that productive labour is that which tends

to increase accumulated wealth; a notion which is implied rather

than stated in the celebrated chapter of The Wealth of Nations

which bears the title, "On the Accumulation of Capital, or on

Productive and Unproductive Labour." (Comp. Travers Twiss,

Progress of Political Economy, Sect. vi, and the discussions on

the word Productive in J.S. Mill's Essays, and in his Principles

of Political Economy.)



7. Among the means of production are included the necessaries of

labour but not ephemeral luxuries; and the maker of ices is thus

classed as unproductive whether he is working for a pastry cook,

or as a private servant in a country house. But a bricklayer

engaged in building a theatre is classed as productive. No doubt

the division between permanent and ephemeral sources of enjoyment

is vague and unsubstantial. But this difficulty exists in the

nature of things and cannot be completely evaded by any device of

words. We can speak of an increase of tall men relatively to

short, without deciding whether all those above five feet nine

inches are to be classed as tall, or only those above five feet

ten. And we can speak of the increase of productive labour at the

expense of unproductive without fixing on any rigid, and

therefore arbitrary line of division between them. If such an

artificial line is required for any particular purpose, it must

be drawn explicitly for the occasion. But in fact such occasions

seldom or never occur.



8. All the distinctions in which the word Productive is used are

very thin and have a certain air of unreality. It would hardly be

worth while to introduce them now: but they have a long history;

and it is probably better that they should dwindle gradually out

of use, rather than be suddenly discarded.

    The attempt to draw a hard and fast line of distinction where

there is no real discontinuity in nature has often done more

mischief, but has perhaps never led to more quaint results, than

in the rigid definitions which have been sometimes given of this

term Productive. Some of them for instance lead to the conclusion

that a singer in an opera is unproductive, that the printer of

the tickets of admission to the opera is productive; while the

usher who shows people to their places is unproductive, unless he

happens to sell programmes, and then he is productive. Senior

points out that "a cook is not said to make roast meat but to

dress it; but he is said to make a pudding.... A tailor is said

to make cloth into a coat, a dyer is not said to make undyed

cloth into dyed cloth. The change produced by the dyer is perhaps

greater than that produced by the tailor, but the cloth in

passing through the tailor's hands changes its name; in passing

through the dyer's it does not: the dyer has not produced a new

name, nor consequently a new thing." Pol. Econ. pp. 51-2.



9. Compare Carver, Principles of Political Economy, p. 474; which

called my attention to Adam Smith's observation that customary

decencies are in effect necessaries.



10. Thus in the South of England population has increased during

the last hundred years at a fair rate, allowance being made for

migration. But the efficiency of labour, which in earlier times

was as high as that in the North of England, has sunk relatively

to the North; so that the low-waged labour of the South is often

dearer than the more highly-paid labour of the North. We cannot

thus say whether the labourers in the South have been supplied

with necessaries, unless we know in which of these two senses the

word is used. They have had the bare necessaries for existence

and the increase of numbers, but apparently they have not had the

necessaries for efficiency. It must however be remembered that

the strongest labourers in the South have constantly migrated to

the North; and that the energies of those in the North have been

raised by their larger share of economic freedom and of the hope

of rising to a higher position. See Mackay in Charity

Organization Journal, Feb. 1891.



11. If we considered an individual of exceptional abilities we

should have to take account of the fact that there is not likely

to be the same close correspondence between the real value of his

work for the community and the income which he earns by it, that

there is in the case of an ordinary member of any industrial

class. And we should have to say that all his consumption is

strictly productive and necessary, so long as by cutting off any

part of it he would diminish his efficiency by an amount that is

of more real value to him or the rest of the world than he saved

from his consumption. If a Newton or a Watt could have added a

hundredth part to his efficiency by doubling his personal

expenditure, the increase in his consumption would have been

truly productive. As we shall see later on, such a case is

analogous to additional cultivation of rich land that bears a

high rent: it may be profitable though the return to it is less

than in proportion to the previous outlay.



12. Compare the distinction between "Physical and Political

Necessaries" in James Steuart's Inquiry, A.D. 1767, II, xxi.



13. Thus a dish of green peas in March, costing perhaps ten

shillings, is a superfluous luxury: but yet it is wholesome food,

and does the work perhaps of three pennyworth of cabbage; or

even, since variety undoubtedly conduces to health, a little more

than that. So it may be entered perhaps at the value of fourpence

under the head of necessaries, and at that of nine shillings and

eightpence under that of superfluities; and its consumption may

be regarded as strictly productive to the extent of one fortieth.

In exceptional cases, as for instance when the peas are given to

an invalid, the whole ten shillings may be well spent, and

reproduce their own value.

    For the sake of giving definiteness to the ideas it may be

well to venture on estimates of necessaries, rough and random as

they must be. Perhaps at present prices the strict necessaries

for an average agricultural family are covered by fifteen or

eighteen shillings a week, the conventional necessaries by about

five shillings more. For the unskilled labourer in the town a few

shillings must be added to the strict necessaries. For the family

of the skilled workman living in a town we may take twenty-five

or thirty shillings for strict necessaries, and ten shillings for

conventional necessaries. For a man whose brain has to undergo

great continuous strain the strict necessaries are perhaps two

hundred or two hundred and fifty pounds a year if he is a

bachelor: but more than twice as much if he has an expensive

family to educate. His conventional necessaries depend on the

nature of his calling.



Chapter 4



Income, Capital



    1. In a primitive community each family is nearly

self-sufficing, and provides most of its own food and clothing

and even household furniture. Only a very small part of the

income, or comings in, of the family is in the form of money;

when one thinks of their income at all, one reckons in the

benefits which they get from their cooking utensils, just as much

as those which they get from their plough: one draws no

distinction between their capital and the rest of their

accumulated stock, to which the cooking utensils and the plough

alike belong.(1*)

    But with the growth of a money economy there has been a

strong tendency to confine the notion of income to those

incomings which are in the form of money; including "payments in

kind" (such as the free use of a house, free coals, gas, water),

which are given as part of an employee's remuneration, and in

lieu of money payments.

    In harmony with this meaning of Income, the language of the

market-place commonly regards a man's capital as that part of his

wealth which he devotes to acquiring an income in the form of

money; or, more generally, to acquisition (Erwerbung) by means of

trade. It may be convenient sometimes to speak of this as his

trade capital; which may be defined to consist of those external

goods which a person uses in his trade, either holding them to be

sold for money or applying them to produce things that are to be

sold for money. Among its conspicuous elements are such things as

the factory and the business plant of a manufacturer; that is,

his machinery, his raw material, any food, clothing, and

house-room that he may hold for the use of his employees, and the

goodwill of his business.

    To the things in his possession must be added those to which

he has a right and from which he is drawing income: including

loans which he has made on mortgage or in other ways, and all the

command over capital which he may hold under the complex forms of

the modern "money market." On the other hand debts owed by him

must be deducted from his capital.

    This definition of capital from the individual or business

point of view is firmly established in ordinary usage; and it

will be assumed throughout the present treatise whenever we are

discussing problems relating to business in general, and in

particular to the supply of any particular group of commodities

for sale in open market. Income and capital will be discussed

from the point of view of private business in the first half of

the chapter; and afterwards the social point of view will be

considered.

    2. If a person is engaged in business, he is sure to have to

incur certain outgoings for raw material, the hire of labour,

etc. And, in that case, his true or net income is found by

deducting from his gross income "the outgoings that belong to its

production."(2*)

    Anything which a person does for which he is paid directly or

indirectly in money, swells his nominal income; while no services

that he performs for himself are commonly reckoned as adding to

his nominal income. But, though it is best generally to neglect

them when they are trivial, account should for consistency be

taken of them, when they are of a kind which people commonly pay

for having done for them. Thus a woman who makes her own clothes

or a man who digs in his own garden or repairs his own house, is

earning income; just as would the dressmaker, gardener or

carpenter who might be hired to do the work.

    In this connection we may introduce a term of which we shall

have to make frequent use hereafter. The need for it arises from

the fact that every occupation involves other disadvantages

besides the fatigue of the work required in it, and every

occupation offers other advantages besides the receipt of money

wages. The true reward which an occupation offers to labour has

to be calculated by deducting the money value of all its

disadvantages from that of all its advantages; and we may

describe this true reward as the net advantages of the

occupation.

    The payment made by a borrower for the use of a loan for,

say, a year is expressed as the ratio which that payment bears to

the loan, and is called interest. And this term is also used more

broadly to represent the money equivalent of the whole income

which is derived from capital. It is commonly expressed as a

certain percentage on the "capital" sum of the loan. Whenever

this is done the capital must not be regarded as a stock of

things in general. It must be regarded as a stock of one

particular thing, money, which is taken to represent them. Thus

?00 may be lent at four per cent., that is for an interest of ?

yearly. And, if a man employs in business a capital stock of

goods of various kinds which are estimated as worth ?0,000 in

all; then ?00 a year may be said to represent interest at the

rate of four per cent. on that capital, on the supposition that

the aggregate money value of the things which constitute it has

remained unchanged. He would not, however, be willing to continue

the business unless he expected his total net gains from it to

exceed interest on his capital at the current rate. These gains

are called profits.

    The command over goods to a given money value, which can be

applied to any purpose, is often described as "free" or

"floating" capital.(3*)

    When a man is engaged in business, his profits for the year

are the excess of his receipts from his business during the year

over his outlay for his business. The difference between the

value of his stock of plant, material, etc. at the end and at the

beginning of the year is taken as part of his receipts or as part

of his outlay, according as there has been an increase or

decrease of value. What remains of his profits after deducting

interest on his capital at the current rate (allowing, where

necessary, for insurance) is generally called his earnings of

undertaking or management. The ratio in which his profits for the

year stand to his capital is spoken of as his rate of profits.

But this phrase, like the corresponding phrase with regard to

interest, assumes that the money value of the things which

constitute his capital has been estimated: and such an estimate

is often found to involve great difficulties.

    When any particular thing, as a house, a piano, or a sewing

machine is lent out, the payment for it is often called Rent. And

economists may follow this practice without inconvenience when

they are regarding the income from the point of view of the

individual trader. But, as will be argued presently, the balance

of advantage seems to lie in favour of reserving the term Rent

for the income derived from the free gifts of nature, whenever

the discussion of business affairs passes from the point of view

of the individual to that of society at large. And for that

reason, the term Quasirent will be used in the present volume for

the income derived from machines and other appliances for

production made by man. That is to say, any particular machine

may yield an income which is of the nature of a rent, and which

is sometimes called a Rent; though on the whole, there seems to

be some advantage in calling it a Quasi-rent. But we cannot

properly speak of the interest yielded by a machine. If we use

the term "interest" at all, it must be in relation not to the

machine itself, but to its money value. For instance if the work

done by a machine which cost ?00 is wortb ? a year net, that

machine is yielding a quasi-rent of ? which is equivalent to

interest at four per cent. on its original cost: but if the

machine is worth only ?0 now, it is yielding five per cent. on

its present value. This however raises some difficult questions

of principle, which will be discussed in Book V.

    3. Next to consider some details relating to capital. It has

been classed as Consumption capital, and Auxiliary or

Instrumental capital: and though no clear distinction can be

drawn between the two classes, it may sometimes be convenient to

use the terms, with the understanding that they are vague. Where

definiteness is necessary, the terms should be avoided; and

explicit enumerations should be given. The general notion of the

distinction which the terms are designed to suggest, can be

gathered from the following approximate definitions.

    Consumption capital consists of goods in a form to satisfy

wants directly; that is, goods which afford a direct sustenance

to the workers, such as food, clothes, house-room, etc.

    Auxiliary, or instrumental, capital is so called because it

consists of all the goods that aid labour in production. Under

this head come tools, machines, factories, railways, docks,

ships, etc.; and raw materials of all kinds.

    But of course a man's clothes assist him in his work and are

instrumental in keeping him warm; and he derives a direct benefit

from the shelter of his factory as he does from the shelter of

his house.(4*)

    We may follow Mill in distinguishing circulating capital

"which fulfils the whole of its office in the production in which

it is engaged, by a single use," from fixed capital "which exists

in a durable shape and the return to which is spread over a

period of corresponding duration."(5*)

    4. The customary point of view of the business man is that

which is most convenient for the economist to adopt when

discussing the production of goods for a market, and the causes

which govern their exchange value. But there is a broader point

of view which the business man, no less than the economist, must

adopt when he studies the causes which govern the material

wellbeing of the community as a whole. Ordinary conversation may

pass from one point of view to another without any formal note of

the change: for if a misunderstanding arises it soon becomes

manifest; and confusion is cut short by a question or by a

volunteered explanation. But the economist may take no risks of

that sort: he must make prominent any change in his point of view

or in his uses of terms. His path might have seemed smoother for

the time, if he had passed silently from one use to another: but

in the long run better progress is made by a clear indication of

the meaning attached to each term in every doubtful case.(6*)

    Let us then during the remainder of this chapter deliberately

adopt the social, in contrast with the individual point of view:

let us look at the production of the community as a whole, and at

its total net income available for all purposes. That is, let us

revert nearly to the point of view of a primitive people, who are

chiefly concerned with the production of desirable things, and

with their direct uses; and who are little concerned with

exchange and marketing.

    From this point of view income is regarded as including all

the benefits which mankind derive at any time from their efforts,

in the present and in the past, to turn nature's resources to

their best account. The pleasure derived from the beauties of the

rainbow, or the sweet taste of the fresh morning air, are left

out of the reckoning, not because they are unimportant, nor

because the estimate would in any way be vitiated by including

them; but solely because reckoning them in would serve no good

purpose, while it would add greatly to the length of our

sentences and the prolixity of our discussions. For a similar

reason it is not worth while to take separate account of the

simple services which nearly every one renders to himself, such

as putting on his clothes; though there are a few persons who

choose to pay others to do such things for them. Their exclusion

involves no principle; and time spent by some controversial

writers on discussing it has been wasted. It simply follows the

maxim De minimis non curat lex. A driver who, not noticing a pool

in his way, splashes a passer by is not held to have done him

legal injury; though there is no distinction in principle between

his act and that of another, who by a similar lack of attention,

did serious harm to someone else.

    A man's present labour yields him income directly, when

devoted to his own use; and he looks to be paid for it in some

form or another if he devotes it as a matter of business to the

service of others. Similarly any useful thing which he has made

or acquired in the past, or which has been handed down to him,

under the existing institutions of property, by others who have

so made or acquired it, is generally a source of material benefit

to him directly or indirectly. If he applies it in business, this

income generally appears in the form of money. But a broader use

of this term is occasionally needed, which embraces the whole

income of benefits of every sort which a person derives from the

ownership of property however applied: it includes for instance

the benefits which he gets from the use of his own piano, equally

with those which a piano dealer would win by letting out a piano

on hire. The language of common life while averse to so broad a

use of the term Income as this even when discussing social

problems, yet habitually includes a certain number of forms of

income, other than money income.

    The Income Tax Commissioners count a dwelling-house inhabited

by its owner as a source of taxable income, though it yields its

income of comfort directly. They do this, not on any abstract

principle; but partly because of the practical importance of

house-room, partly because the ownership of a house is commonly

treated in a business fashion, and partly because the real income

accruing from it can easily be separated off and estimated. They

do not claim to establish any absolute distinction in kind

between the things which their rule includes, and those which it

excludes.

    Jevons, regarding the problem from a purely mathematical

point of view, was justified in classing all commodities in the

hands of consumers as capital. But some writers, while developing

this suggestion with great ingenuity, have treated it as a great

principle; and that appears to be an error in judgment. A true

sense of proportion requires us not to burden our work with the

incessant enumeration of details of secondary importance, of

which no account is taken in customary discourse, and which

cannot even be described without offending against popular

conventions.

    5. This brings us to consider the use of the term capital

from the point of view of inquiries into the material wellbeing

of society as a whole. Adam Smith said that a person's capital is

that part of his stock from which he expects to derive an income.

And almost every use of the term capital, which is known to

history, has corresponded more or less closely to a parallel use

of the term Income: in almost every use, capital has been that

part of a man's stock from which he expects to derive an income.

    By far the most important use of the term Capital in general,

i.e. from the social point of view, is in the inquiry how the

three agents of production, land (that is, natural agents),

labour and capital, contribute to producing the national income

(or the national dividend, as it will be called later on); and

how that income is distributed among the three agents. And this

is an additional reason for making the terms Capital and Income

correlative from the social, as we did from the individual point

of view.

    Accordingly it is proposed in this treatise to count as part

of capital from the social point of view all things other than

land, which yield income that is generally reckoned as such in

common discourse; together with similar things in public

ownership, such as government factories: the term Land being

taken to include all free gifts of nature, such as mines,

fisheries, etc., which yield income.

    Thus it will include all things held for trade purposes,

whether machinery, raw material or finished goods; theatres and

hotels; home farms and houses: but not furniture or clothes owned

by those who use them. For the former are and the latter are not

commonly regarded as yielding income by the world at large, as is

shown by the practice of the income tax commissioners.

    This usage of the term is in harmony with the common practice

of economists of treating social problems in broad outline to

start with, and reserving minor details for later consideration:

it is in harmony also with their common practice of taking Labour

to include those activities, and those only, which are regarded

as the source of income in this broader use of the term. Labour

together with capital and land thus defined are the sources of

all that income of which account is commonly taken in reckoning

up the National Income.(*7)

    6. Social income may be estimated by adding together the

incomes of the individuals in the society in question, whether it

be a nation or any other group of persons.

    We must however not count the same thing twice. If we have

counted a carpet at its full value, we have already counted the

values of the yarn and the labour that were used in making it;

and these must not be counted again. And further, if the carpet

was made of wool that was in stock at the beginning of the year,

the value of that wool must be deducted from the value of the

carpet before the net income of the year is reached; while

similar deduction must be made for the wear and tear of machinery

and other plant used in making it. This is required by the

general rule, with which we started, that true or net income is

found by deducting from gross income the outgoings that belong to

its production.

    But if the carpet is cleaned by domestic servants or at steam

scouring works, the value of the labour spent in cleaning it must

be counted in separately; for otherwise the results of this

labour would be altogether omitted from the inventory of those

newly-produced commodities and conveniences which constitute the

real income of the country. The work of domestic servants is

always classed as "labour" in the technical sense; and since it

can be assessed en bloc at the value of their remuneration in

money and in kind without being enumerated in detail, its

inclusion raises no great statistical difficulty. There is

however some inconsistency in omitting the heavy domestic work

which is done by women and other members of the household, where

no servants are kept.

    Again, suppose a landowner with an annual income of ?0,000

hires a private secretary at a salary of ?00, who hires a

servant at wages of ?0. It may seem that if the incomes of all

these three persons are counted in as part of the net income of

the country, some of it will be counted twice over, and some

three times. But this is not the case. The landlord transfers to

his secretary, in return for his assistance, part of the

purchasing power derived from the produce of land; and the

secretary again transfers part of this to his servant in return

for his assistance. The farm produce the value of which goes as

rent to the landlord, the assistance which the landlord derives

from the work of the secretary, and that which the secretary

derives from the work of the servant are independent parts of the

real net income of the country; and therefore the ?0,000 and the

?00 and the ?0 which are their money measures, must all be

counted in when we are estimating the income of the country. But

if the landlord makes an allowance of ?00 a year to his son,

that must not be counted as an independent income; because no

services are rendered for it. And it would not be assessed to the

Income tax.

    As the net payments on account of interest etc. due to an

individual-net, i.e. after deducting those due from him to others

are part of his income, so the money and other things received

net by a nation from other countries are part of its income.

    7. The money income, or inflow, of wealth gives a measure of

a nation's prosperity, which, untrustworthy as it is, is yet in

some respects better than that afforded by the money value of its

stock of wealth.

    For income consists chiefly of commodities in a form to give

pleasure directly; while the greater part of national wealth

consists of the means of production, which are of service to the

nation only in so far as they contribute to producing commodities

ready for consumption. And further, though this is a minor point,

consumable commodities, being more portable, have more nearly

uniform prices all the world over than the things used in

producing them: the prices of an acre of good land in Manitoba

and Kent differ more tban those of a bushel of wheat in the two

places.

    But if we look chiefly at the income of a country we must

allow for the depreciation of the sources from which it is

derived. More must be deducted from the income derived from a

house if it is made of wood, than if it is made of stone; a stone

house counts for more towards the real richness of a country than

a wooden house which gives equally good accommodation. Again, a

mine may yield for a time a large income, but be exhausted in a

few years: in that case, it must be counted as equivalent to a

field, or a fishery, which yields a much smaller annual income,

but will yield that income permanently.

    8. In purely abstract, and especially in mathematical,

reasoning the terms Capital and Wealth are used as synonymous

almost perforce, except that "land" proper may for some purposes

be omitted from Capital. But there is a clear tradition that we

should speak of Capital when considering things as agents of

production; and that we should speak of Wealth when considering

them as results of production, as subjects of consumption and as

yielding pleasures of possession. Thus the chief demand for

capital arises from its productiveness, from the services which

it renders, for instance, in enabling wool to be spun and woven

more easily than by the unaided hand, or in causing water to flow

freely wherever it is wanted instead of being carried laboriously

in pails; (though there are other uses of capital, as for

instance when it is lent to a spendthrift, which cannot easily be

brought under this head). On the other hand the supply of capital

is controlled by the fact that, in order to accumulate it, men

must act prospectively: they must "wait" and "save," they must

sacrifice the present to the future.

    At the beginning of this Book it was argued that the

economist must forego the aid of a complete set of technical

terms. He must make the terms in common use serve his purpose in

the expression of precise thought, by the aid of qualifying

adjectives or other indications in the context. If he arbitrarily

assigns a rigid exact use to a word which has several more or

less vague uses in the market place, he confuses business men,

and he is in some danger of committing himself to untenable

positions. The selection of a normal use for such terms as Income

and Capital must therefore be tested by actually working with

it.(8*)



NOTES:



1. This and similar facts have led some people to suppose not

only that some parts of the modern analysis of distribution and

exchange are inapplicable to a primitive community; which is

true: but also that there are no important parts of it that are

applicable; which is not true. This is a striking instance of the

dangers that arise from allowing ourselves to become the servants

of words, avoiding the hard work that is required for discovering

unity of substance under lying variety of form.



2. See a report of a Committee of the British Association, 1878,

on the Income Tax.



3. Professor Clark has made the suggestion to distinguish between

Pure Capital and Capital Goods: the former is to correspond to a

waterfall which remains stationary; while Capital Goods are the

particular things which enter and leave the business, as

particular drops pass through the waterfall. He would of course

connect interest with pure capital, not with capital goods.



4. See above II, iii, sec. 1.



5. Adam Smith's distinction between fixed and circulating capital

turned on the question whether the goods "yield a profit without

changing masters" or not. Ricardo made it turn on whether they

are "of slow consumption or require to be frequently reproduced";

but he truly remarks that this is "a division not essential, and

in which the line of demarcation cannot be accurately drawn."

Mill's modification is generally accepted by modern economists.



6. Compare above II. i, sec. 3.



7. Just as for practical purposes it is better not to encumber

ourselves with specifying the "income" of benefit which a man

derives from the labour of brushing his hat in the morning, so it

is better to ignore the element of capital vested in his brush.

But no such consideration arises in a merely abstract discussion:

and therefore the logical simplicity of Jevons' dictum that

commodities in the hands of consumers are capital has some

advantages and no disadvantages for mathematical versions of

economic doctrines.



8. A short forecast of some of this work may be given here. It

will be seen how Capital needs to be considered in regard both to

the embodied aggregate of the benefits derivable from its use,

and to the embodied aggregate of the costs of the efforts and of

the saving needed for its production: and it will be shown how

these two aggregates tend to balance. Thus in V, IV, which may be

taken as in some sense a continuation of the present chapter,

they will be seen balancing directly in the forecasts of an

individual Robinson Crusoe; and for the greater part at least in

terms of money in the forecasts of a modern business man. In

either case both sides of the account must be referred to the

same date of time; those that come after that date being

"discounted" back to it; and those that come before being

"accumulated" up to it.

    A similar balancing in regard to the benefits and the costs

of capital at large will be found to be a chief corner stone of

social economy: although it is true that in consequence of the

unequal distribution of wealth, accounts cannot be made up from

the social point of view with that clearness of outline that is

attainable in the case of an individual, whether a Robinson

Crusoe, or a modern business man. In every part of our discussion

of the causes that govern the accumulation and the application of

productive resources, it will appear that there is no universal

rule that the use of roundabout methods of production is more

efficient than direct methods; that there are some conditions

under which the investment of effort in obtaining machinery and

in making costly provision against future wants is economical in

the long run, and others in which it is not: and that capital is

accumulated in proportion to the prospectiveness of man on the

one hand, and on the other to the absorption of capital by those

roundabout methods, which are sufficiently productive to

remunerate their adoption. See especially IV, VII, sec, 8; V, IV,

VI, I, sec. 8; and VI, VI, sec. 1.

    The broader forces, that govern the production of capital in

general and its contribution to the national income, are

discussed in IV, VII, IX XI: the imperfect adjustments of the

money measures of benefits and costs to their real volume are

discussed chieJy in III, III-V; IV, VII; and VI, III VIII; the

resulting share in the total product of labour and capital, aided

by natural resources, which goes to capital, is discussed chieJy

in VI, I, II, VI-VII, XI, XII.

    Some of the chief incidents in the history of the definitions

of Capital are given in Appendix E.




