




CHAPTER XXII



THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EDISON STORAGE

BATTERY



IT is more than a hundred years since the elementary

principle of the storage battery or "accumulator"

was detected by a Frenchman named Gautherot; it

is just fifty years since another Frenchman, named

Plante, discovered that on taking two thin plates of

sheet lead, immersing them in dilute sulphuric acid,

and passing an electric current through the cell, the

combination exhibited the ability to give back part

of the original charging current, owing to the chemical

changes and reactions set up. Plante coiled up his

sheets into a very handy cell like a little roll of carpet

or pastry; but the trouble was that the battery took a

long time to "form." One sheet becoming coated

with lead peroxide and the other with finely divided

or spongy metallic lead, they would receive current,

and then, even after a long period of inaction, furnish

or return an electromotive force of from 1.85

to 2.2 volts. This ability to store up electrical energy

produced by dynamos in hours otherwise idle, whether

driven by steam, wind, or water, was a distinct advance

in the art; but the sensational step was taken about

1880, when Faure in France and Brush in America

broke away from the slow and weary process of "form-

ing" the plates, and hit on clever methods of furnishing

them "ready made," so to speak, by dabbing red

lead onto lead-grid plates, just as butter is spread on a

slice of home-made bread. This brought the storage

battery at once into use as a practical, manufactured

piece of apparatus; and the world was captivated

with the idea. The great English scientist, Sir

William Thomson, went wild with enthusiasm when

a Faure "box of electricity" was brought over from

Paris to him in 1881 containing a million foot-pounds

of stored energy. His biographer, Dr. Sylvanus P.

Thompson, describes him as lying ill in bed with a

wounded leg, and watching results with an incandescent

lamp fastened to his bed curtain by a safety-pin,

and lit up by current from the little Faure cell. Said

Sir William: "It is going to be a most valuable,

practical affair--as valuable as water-cisterns to

people whether they had or had not systems of water-

pipes and water-supply." Indeed, in one outburst

of panegyric the shrewd physicist remarked that he

saw in it "a realization of the most ardently and

increasingly felt scientific aspiration of his life--an

aspiration which he hardly dared to expect or to see

realized." A little later, however, Sir William,

always cautious and canny, began to discover the

inherent defects of the primitive battery, as to

disintegration, inefficiency, costliness, etc., and though

offered tempting inducements, declined to lend his

name to its financial introduction. Nevertheless, he

accepted the principle as valuable, and put the battery

to actual use.



For many years after this episode, the modern lead-

lead type of battery thus brought forward with so

great a flourish of trumpets had a hard time of it.

Edison's attitude toward it, even as a useful

supplement to his lighting system, was always one of

scepticism, and he remarked contemptuously that the

best storage battery he knew was a ton of coal. The

financial fortunes of the battery, on both sides of the

Atlantic, were as varied and as disastrous as its

industrial; but it did at last emerge, and "made good."

By 1905, the production of lead-lead storage batteries

in the United States alone had reached a value for

the year of nearly $3,000,000, and it has increased

greatly since that time. The storage battery is now

regarded as an important and indispensable adjunct

in nearly all modern electric-lighting and electric-

railway systems of any magnitude; and in 1909, in

spite of its weight, it had found adoption in over ten

thousand automobiles of the truck, delivery wagon,

pleasure carriage, and runabout types in America.



Edison watched closely all this earlier development

for about fifteen years, not changing his mind as to

what he regarded as the incurable defects of the lead-

lead type, but coming gradually to the conclusion

that if a storage battery of some other and better

type could be brought forward, it would fulfil all the

early hopes, however extravagant, of such men as

Kelvin (Sir William Thomson), and would become as

necessary and as universal as the incandescent lamp

or the electric motor. The beginning of the present

century found him at his point of new departure.



Generally speaking, non-technical and uninitiated

persons have a tendency to regard an invention as

being more or less the ultimate result of some happy

inspiration. And, indeed, there is no doubt that such

may be the fact in some instances; but in most cases

the inventor has intentionally set out to accomplish

a definite and desired result--mostly through the

application of the known laws of the art in which he

happens to be working. It is rarely, however, that

a man will start out deliberately, as Edison did, to

evolve a radically new type of such an intricate device

as the storage battery, with only a meagre clew and

a vague starting-point.



In view of the successful outcome of the problem

which, in 1900, he undertook to solve, it will be

interesting to review his mental attitude at that period.

It has already been noted at the end of a previous

chapter that on closing the magnetic iron-ore

concentrating plant at Edison, New Jersey, he resolved

to work on a new type of storage battery. It was

about this time that, in the course of a conversation

with Mr. R. H. Beach, then of the street-railway

department of the General Electric Company, he said:

"Beach, I don't think Nature would be so unkind as

to withhold the secret of a GOOD storage battery if a

real earnest hunt for it is made. I'm going to hunt."



Frequently Edison has been asked what he considers

the secret of achievement. To this query he

has invariably replied: "Hard work, based on hard

thinking." The laboratory records bear the fullest

witness that he has consistently followed out this

prescription to the utmost. The perfection of all his

great inventions has been signalized by patient,

persistent, and incessant effort which, recognizing noth-

ing short of success, has resulted in the ultimate

accomplishment of his ideas. Optimistic and hopeful

to a high degree, Edison has the happy faculty of

beginning the day as open-minded as a child--yesterday's

disappointments and failures discarded and

discounted by the alluring possibilities of to-morrow.



Of all his inventions, it is doubtful whether any one

of them has called forth more original thought, work,

perseverance, ingenuity, and monumental patience

than the one we are now dealing with. One of his

associates who has been through the many years of

the storage-battery drudgery with him said: "If

Edison's experiments, investigations, and work on

this storage battery were all that he had ever done,

I should say that he was not only a notable inventor,

but also a great man. It is almost impossible to

appreciate the enormous difficulties that have been

overcome."



From a beginning which was made practically in

the dark, it was not until he had completed more

than ten thousand experiments that he obtained any

positive preliminary results whatever. Through all

this vast amount of research there had been no previous

signs of the electrical action he was looking for.

These experiments had extended over many months

of constant work by day and night, but there was

no breakdown of Edison's faith in ultimate success--

no diminution of his sanguine and confident expectations.

The failure of an experiment simply meant

to him that he had found something else that would

not work, thus bringing the possible goal a little nearer

by a process of painstaking elimination.



Now, however, after these many months of arduous

toil, in which he had examined and tested practically

all the known elements in numerous chemical

combinations, the electric action he sought for had

been obtained, thus affording him the first inkling of

the secret that he had industriously tried to wrest

from Nature. It should be borne in mind that from

the very outset Edison had disdained any intention of

following in the only tracks then known by employing

lead and sulphuric acid as the components of a

successful storage battery. Impressed with what he

considered the serious inherent defects of batteries

made of these materials, and the tremendously complex

nature of the chemical reactions taking place in

all types of such cells, he determined boldly at the

start that he would devise a battery without lead,

and one in which an alkaline solution could be used--

a form which would, he firmly believed, be inherently

less subject to decay and dissolution than the standard

type, which after many setbacks had finally won

its way to an annual production of many thousands

of cells, worth millions of dollars.



Two or three thousand of the first experiments followed

the line of his well-known primary battery in

the attempted employment of copper oxide as an

element in a new type of storage cell; but its use

offered no advantages, and the hunt was continued

in other directions and pursued until Edison satisfied

himself by a vast number of experiments that nickel

and iron possessed the desirable qualifications he was

in search of.



This immense amount of investigation which had

consumed so many months of time, and which had

culminated in the discovery of a series of reactions

between nickel and iron that bore great promise,

brought Edison merely within sight of a strange and

hitherto unexplored country. Slowly but surely the

results of the last few thousands of his preliminary

experiments had pointed inevitably to a new and

fruitful region ahead. He had discovered the hidden

passage and held the clew which he had so industriously

sought. And now, having outlined a definite path,

Edison was all afire to push ahead vigorously in order

that he might enter in and possess the land.



It is a trite saying that "history repeats itself,"

and certainly no axiom carries more truth than this

when applied to the history of each of Edison's

important inventions. The development of the storage

battery has been no exception; indeed, far from

otherwise, for in the ten years that have elapsed since

the time he set himself and his mechanics, chemists,

machinists, and experimenters at work to develop a

practical commercial cell, the old story of incessant

and persistent efforts so manifest in the working out

of other inventions was fully repeated.



Very soon after he had decided upon the use of

nickel and iron as the elemental metals for his storage

battery, Edison established a chemical plant at Silver

Lake, New Jersey, a few miles from the Orange

laboratory, on land purchased some time previously.

This place was the scene of the further experiments

to develop the various chemical forms of nickel and

iron, and to determine by tests what would be best

adapted for use in cells manufactured on a com-

mercial scale. With a little handful of selected

experimenters gathered about him, Edison settled down

to one of his characteristic struggles for supremacy.

To some extent it was a revival of the old Menlo

Park days (or, rather, nights). Some of these who

had worked on the preliminary experiments, with the

addition of a few new-comers, toiled together regardless

of passing time and often under most discouraging

circumstances, but with that remarkable esprit

de corps that has ever marked Edison's relations with

his co-workers, and that has contributed so largely

to the successful carrying out of his ideas.



The group that took part in these early years of

Edison's arduous labors included his old-time assistant,

Fred Ott, together with his chemist, J. W.

Aylsworth, as well as E. J. Ross, Jr., W. E. Holland,

and Ralph Arbogast, and a little later W. G. Bee, all

of whom have grown up with the battery and still

devote their energies to its commercial development.

One of these workers, relating the strenuous experiences

of these few years, says: "It was hard work

and long hours, but still there were some things that

made life pleasant. One of them was the supper-hour

we enjoyed when we worked nights. Mr. Edison

would have supper sent in about midnight, and we

all sat down together, including himself. Work was

forgotten for the time, and all hands were ready for

fun. I have very pleasant recollections of Mr. Edison

at these times. He would always relax and help to

make a good time, and on some occasions I have seen

him fairly overflow with animal spirits, just like a boy

let out from school. After the supper-hour was over,

however, he again became the serious, energetic inventor,

deeply immersed in the work at hand.



"He was very fond of telling and hearing stories,

and always appreciated a joke. I remember one that

he liked to get off on us once in a while. Our lighting

plant was in duplicate, and about 12.30 or 1 o'clock

in the morning, at the close of the supper-hour, a

change would be made from one plant to the other,

involving the gradual extinction of the electric lights

and their slowly coming up to candle-power again,

the whole change requiring probably about thirty

seconds. Sometimes, as this was taking place, Edison

would fold his hands, compose himself as if he

were in sound sleep, and when the lights were full

again would apparently wake up, with the remark,

`Well, boys, we've had a fine rest; now let's pitch into

work again.' "



Another interesting and amusing reminiscence of

this period of activity has been gathered from another

of the family of experimenters: "Sometimes,

when Mr. Edison had been working long hours, he

would want to have a short sleep. It was one of the

funniest things I ever witnessed to see him crawl into

an ordinary roll-top desk and curl up and take a nap.

If there was a sight that was still more funny, it was

to see him turn over on his other side, all the time

remaining in the desk. He would use several volumes

of Watts's Dictionary of Chemistry for a pillow, and

we fellows used to say that he absorbed the contents

during his sleep, judging from the flow of new ideas

he had on waking."



Such incidents as these serve merely to illustrate

the lighter moments that stand out in relief against

the more sombre background of the strenuous years,

for, of all the absorbingly busy periods of Edison's

inventive life, the first five years of the storage-

battery era was one of the very busiest of them all. It

was not that there remained any basic principle to

be discovered or simplified, for that had already been

done; but it was in the effort to carry these principles

into practice that there arose the numerous

difficulties that at times seemed insurmountable.

But, according to another co-worker, "Edison seemed

pleased when he used to run up against a serious

difficulty. It would seem to stiffen his backbone

and make him more prolific of new ideas. For a

time I thought I was foolish to imagine such a thing,

but I could never get away from the impression that

he really appeared happy when he ran up against

a serious snag. That was in my green days, and I

soon learned that the failure of an experiment never

discourages him unless it is by reason of the carelessness

of the man making it. Then Edison gets disgusted.

If it fails on its merits, he doesn't worry or

fret about it, but, on the contrary, regards it as a

useful fact learned; remains cheerful and tries something

else. I have known him to reverse an unsuccessful

experiment and come out all right."



To follow Edison's trail in detail through the

innumerable twists and turns of his experimentation

and research on the storage battery, during the past

ten years, would not be in keeping with the scope of

this narrative, nor would it serve any useful purpose.

Besides, such details would fill a big volume. The

narrative, however, would not be complete without

some mention of the general outline of his work, and

reference may be made briefly to a few of the chief

items. And lest the reader think that the word

"innumerable" may have been carelessly or hastily

used above, we would quote the reply of one of the

laboratory assistants when asked how many experiments

had been made on the Edison storage battery

since the year 1900: "Goodness only knows! We

used to number our experiments consecutively from

1 to 10,000, and when we got up to 10,000 we turned

back to 1 and ran up to 10,000 again, and so on.

We ran through several series--I don't know how

many, and have lost track of them now, but it was

not far from fifty thousand."



From the very first, Edison's broad idea of his

storage battery was to make perforated metallic

containers having the active materials packed therein;

nickel hydrate for the positive and iron oxide for the

negative plate. This plan has been adhered to

throughout, and has found its consummation in the

present form of the completed commercial cell, but

in the middle ground which stands between the early

crude beginnings and the perfected type of to-day

there lies a world of original thought, patient plodding,

and achievement.



The first necessity was naturally to obtain the best

and purest compounds for active materials. Edison

found that comparatively little was known by manufacturing

chemists about nickel and iron oxides of the

high grade and purity he required. Hence it became

necessary for him to establish his own chemical works

and put them in charge of men specially trained by

himself, with whom he worked. This was the plant

at Silver Lake, above referred to. Here, for several

years, there was ceaseless activity in the preparation

of these chemical compounds by every imaginable

process and subsequent testing. Edison's chief chemist

says: "We left no stone unturned to find a way

of making those chemicals so that they would give

the highest results. We carried on the experiments

with the two chemicals together. Sometimes the

nickel would be ahead in the tests, and then again

it would fall behind. To stimulate us to greater

improvement, Edison hung up a card which showed

the results of tests in milliampere-hours given by the

experimental elements as we tried them with the

various grades of nickel and iron we had made. This

stirred up a great deal of ambition among the boys

to push the figures up. Some of our earliest tests

showed around 300, but as we improved the material,

they gradually crept up to over 500. Just

about that time Edison made a trip to Canada, and

when he came back we had made such good progress

that the figures had crept up to about 1000. I well

remember how greatly he was pleased."



In speaking of the development of the negative

element of the battery, Mr. Aylsworth said: "In

like manner the iron element had to be developed

and improved; and finally the iron, which had generally

enjoyed superiority in capacity over its companion,

the nickel element, had to go in training in

order to retain its lead, which was imperative, in

order to produce a uniform and constant voltage

curve. In talking with me one day about the difficulties

under which we were working and contrasting

them with the phonograph experimentation,

Edison said: `In phonographic work we can use our

ears and our eyes, aided with powerful microscopes;

but in the battery our difficulties cannot be seen or

heard, but must be observed by our mind's eye!' And

by reason of the employment of such vision in the past,

Edison is now able to see quite clearly through the

forest of difficulties after eliminating them one by

one."



The size and shape of the containing pockets in the

battery plates or elements and the degree of their

perforation were matters that received many years of

close study and experiment; indeed, there is still to-

day constant work expended on their perfection,

although their present general form was decided upon

several years ago. The mechanical construction of

the battery, as a whole, in its present form, compels

instant admiration on account of its beauty and

completeness. Mr. Edison has spared neither thought,

ingenuity, labor, nor money in the effort to make it

the most complete and efficient storage cell obtainable,

and the results show that his skill, judgment,

and foresight have lost nothing of the power that

laid the foundation of, and built up, other great arts at

each earlier stage of his career.



Among the complex and numerous problems that

presented themselves in the evolution of the battery

was the one concerning the internal conductivity of

the positive unit. The nickel hydrate was a poor

electrical conductor, and although a metallic nickel

pocket might be filled with it, there would not be

the desired electrical action unless a conducting

substance were mixed with it, and so incorporated and

packed that there would be good electrical contact

throughout. This proved to be a most knotty and

intricate puzzle--tricky and evasive--always leading

on and promising something, and at the last slipping

away leaving the work undone. Edison's remarkable

patience and persistence in dealing with this

trying problem and in finally solving it successfully

won for him more than ordinary admiration from his

associates. One of them, in speaking of the seemingly

interminable experiments to overcome this

trouble, said: "I guess that question of conductivity

of the positive pocket brought lots of gray hairs to

his head. I never dreamed a man could have such

patience and perseverance. Any other man than

Edison would have given the whole thing up a thousand

times, but not he! Things looked awfully blue

to the whole bunch of us many a time, but he was

always hopeful. I remember one time things looked

so dark to me that I had just about made up my

mind to throw up my job, but some good turn came

just then and I didn't. Now I'm glad I held on, for

we've got a great future."



The difficulty of obtaining good electrical contact

in the positive element was indeed Edison's chief

trouble for many years. After a great amount of

work and experimentation he decided upon a certain

form of graphite, which seemed to be suitable for the

purpose, and then proceeded to the commercial

manufacture of the battery at a special factory in

Glen Ridge, New Jersey, installed for the purpose.

There was no lack of buyers, but, on the contrary,

the factory was unable to turn out batteries enough.

The newspapers had previously published articles

showing the unusual capacity and performance of the

battery, and public interest had thus been greatly

awakened.



Notwithstanding the establishment of a regular

routine of manufacture and sale, Edison did not

cease to experiment for improvement. Although

the graphite apparently did the work desired of it,

he was not altogether satisfied with its performance

and made extended trials of other substances, but at

that time found nothing that on the whole served

the purpose better. Continuous tests of the commercial

cells were carried on at the laboratory, as

well as more practical and heavy tests in automobiles,

which were constantly kept running around the adjoining

country over all kinds of roads. All these

tests were very closely watched by Edison, who demanded

rigorously that the various trials of the

battery should be carried on with all strenuousness

so as to get the utmost results and develop any possible

weakness. So insistent was he on this, that if

any automobile should run several days without

bursting a tire or breaking some part of the machine,

he would accuse the chauffeur of picking out easy

roads.



After these tests had been going on for some time,

and some thousands of cells had been sold and were

giving satisfactory results to the purchasers, the test

sheets and experience gathered from various sources

pointed to the fact that occasionally a cell here and

there would show up as being short in capacity.

Inasmuch as the factory processes were very exact

and carefully guarded, and every cell was made as

uniform as human skill and care could provide,

there thus arose a serious problem. Edison

concentrated his powers on the investigation of this

trouble, and found that the chief cause lay in the

graphite. Some other minor matters also attracted

his attention. What to do, was the important question

that confronted him. To shut down the factory

meant great loss and apparent failure. He realized

this fully, but he also knew that to go on would simply

be to increase the number of defective batteries in

circulation, which would ultimately result in a

permanent closure and real failure. Hence he took the

course which one would expect of Edison's common

sense and directness of action. He was not satisfied

that the battery was a complete success, so he shut

down and went to experimenting once more.



"And then," says one of the laboratory men, "we

started on another series of record-breaking experiments

that lasted over five years. I might almost

say heart-breaking, too, for of all the elusive,

disappointing things one ever hunted for that was the

worst. But secrets have to be long-winded and

roost high if they want to get away when the `Old

Man' goes hunting for them. He doesn't get mad

when he misses them, but just keeps on smiling and

firing, and usually brings them into camp. That's

what he did on the battery, for after a whole lot of

work he perfected the nickel-flake idea and process,

besides making the great improvement of using

tubes instead of flat pockets for the positive. He

also added a minor improvement here and there, and

now we have a finer battery than we ever expected."



In the interim, while the experimentation of these

last five years was in progress, many customers who

had purchased batteries of the original type came

knocking at the door with orders in their hands for

additional outfits wherewith to equip more wagons

and trucks. Edison expressed his regrets, but said

he was not satisfied with the old cells and was

engaged in improving them. To which the customers

replied that THEY were entirely satisfied and ready and

willing to pay for more batteries of the same kind;

but Edison could not be moved from his determination,

although considerable pressure was at times

brought to bear to sway his decision.



Experiment was continued beyond the point of

peradventure, and after some new machinery had

been built, the manufacture of the new type of cell

was begun in the early summer of 1909, and at the

present writing is being extended as fast as the

necessary additional machinery can be made. The

product is shipped out as soon as it is completed.



The nickel flake, which is Edison's ingenious solution

of the conductivity problem, is of itself a most

interesting product, intensely practical in its

application and fascinating in its manufacture. The

flake of nickel is obtained by electroplating upon a

metallic cylinder alternate layers of copper and

nickel, one hundred of each, after which the combined

sheet is stripped from the cylinder. So thin

are the layers that this sheet is only about the thickness

of a visiting-card, and yet it is composed of two

hundred layers of metal. The sheet is cut into tiny

squares, each about one-sixteenth of an inch, and

these squares are put into a bath where the copper

is dissolved out. This releases the layers of nickel,

so that each of these small squares becomes one

hundred tiny sheets, or flakes, of pure metallic nickel,

so thin that when they are dried they will float in the

air, like thistle-down.



In their application to the manufacture of batteries,

the flakes are used through the medium of a special

machine, so arranged that small charges of nickel

hydrate and nickel flake are alternately fed into the

pockets intended for positives, and tamped down with

a pressure equal to about four tons per square inch.

This insures complete and perfect contact and consequent

electrical conductivity throughout the entire

unit.



The development of the nickel flake contains in itself

a history of patient investigation, labor, and

achievement, but we have not space for it, nor for

tracing the great work that has been done in developing

and perfecting the numerous other parts and

adjuncts of this remarkable battery. Suffice it to

say that when Edison went boldly out into new territory,

after something entirely unknown, he was quite

prepared for hard work and exploration. He encountered

both in unstinted measure, but kept on

going forward until, after long travel, he had found

all that he expected and accomplished something

more beside. Nature DID respond to his whole-

hearted appeal, and, by the time the hunt was ended,

revealed a good storage battery of entirely new type.

Edison not only recognized and took advantage of

the principles he had discovered, but in adapting

them for commercial use developed most ingenious

processes and mechanical appliances for carrying his

discoveries into practical effect. Indeed, it may be

said that the invention of an enormous variety of

new machines and mechanical appliances rendered

necessary by each change during the various stages

of development of the battery, from first to last,

stands as a lasting tribute to the range and versatility

of his powers.



It is not within the scope of this narrative to enter

into any description of the relative merits of the

Edison storage battery, that being the province of a

commercial catalogue. It does, however, seem entirely

allowable to say that while at the present

writing the tests that have been made extend over a

few years only, their results and the intrinsic value

of this characteristic Edison invention are of such a

substantial nature as to point to the inevitable

growth of another great industry arising from its

manufacture, and to its wide-spread application to

many uses.



The principal use that Edison has had in mind for

his battery is transportation of freight and passengers

by truck, automobile, and street-car. The greatly

increased capacity in proportion to weight of the

Edison cell makes it particularly adaptable for this

class of work on account of the much greater radius

of travel that is possible by its use. The latter point

of advantage is the one that appeals most to the

automobilist, as he is thus enabled to travel, it is

asserted, more than three times farther than ever

before on a single charge of the battery.



Edison believes that there are important advantages

possible in the employment of his storage battery

for street-car propulsion. Under the present

system of operation, a plant furnishing the electric

power for street railways must be large enough to

supply current for the maximum load during "rush

hours," although much of the machinery may be

lying idle and unproductive in the hours of minimum

load. By the use of storage-battery cars, this

immense and uneconomical maximum investment in

plant can be cut down to proportions of true commercial

economy, as the charging of the batteries can

be conducted at a uniform rate with a reasonable

expenditure for generating machinery. Not only this,

but each car becomes an independently moving unit,

not subject to delay by reason of a general breakdown

of the power plant or of the line. In addition

to these advantages, the streets would be freed from

their burden of trolley wires or conduits. To put his

ideas into practice, Edison built a short railway line

at the Orange works in the winter of 1909-10, and, in

co-operation with Mr. R. H. Beach, constructed a

special type of street-car, and equipped it with motor,

storage battery, and other necessary operating devices.

This car was subsequently put upon the street-car

lines in New York City, and demonstrated its efficiency

so completely that it was purchased by one

of the street-car companies, which has since ordered

additional cars for its lines. The demonstration of

this initial car has been watched with interest by

many railroad officials, and its performance has been

of so successful a nature that at the present writing

(the summer of 1910) it has been necessary to organize

and equip a preliminary factory in which to

construct many other cars of a similar type that

have been ordered by other street-railway companies.

This enterprise will be conducted by a corporation

which has been specially organized for the purpose.

Thus, there has been initiated the development of a

new and important industry whose possible ultimate

proportions are beyond the range of present calculation.

Extensive as this industry may become, however,

Edison is firmly convinced that the greatest

field for his storage battery lies in its adaptation to

commercial trucking and hauling, and to pleasure

vehicles, in comparison with which the street-car

business even with its great possibilities--will not

amount to more than 1 per cent.



Edison has pithily summed up his work and his

views in an article on "The To-Morrows of Electricity

and Invention" in Popular Electricity for June, 1910,

in which he says: "For years past I have been trying

to perfect a storage battery, and have now rendered

it entirely suitable to automobile and other work.

There is absolutely no reason why horses should be

allowed within city limits; for between the gasoline

and the electric car, no room is left for them. They

are not needed. The cow and the pig have gone,

and the horse is still more undesirable. A higher

public ideal of health and cleanliness is working tow-

ard such banishment very swiftly; and then we shall

have decent streets, instead of stables made out of

strips of cobblestones bordered by sidewalks. The

worst use of money is to make a fine thoroughfare,

and then turn it over to horses. Besides that, the

change will put the humane societies out of business.

Many people now charge their own batteries because

of lack of facilities; but I believe central stations

will find in this work very soon the largest part of

their load. The New York Edison Company, or the

Chicago Edison Company, should have as much current

going out for storage batteries as for power

motors; and it will be so some near day."


