




CHAPTER XX



EDISON PORTLAND CEMENT



NEW developments in recent years have been more

striking than the general adoption of cement

for structural purposes of all kinds in the United

States; or than the increase in its manufacture here.

As a material for the construction of office buildings,

factories, and dwellings, it has lately enjoyed an

extraordinary vogue; yet every indication is

confirmatory of the belief that such use has barely begun.

Various reasons may be cited, such as the growing

scarcity of wood, once the favorite building material

in many parts of the country, and the increasing dearness

of brick and stone. The fact remains, indisputable,

and demonstrated flatly by the statistics

of production. In 1902 the American output of

cement was placed at about 21,000,000 barrels, valued

at over $17,000,000. In 1907 the production is given

as nearly 49,000,000 barrels. Here then is an

industry that doubled in five years. The average rate

of industrial growth in the United States is 10 per

cent. a year, or doubling every ten years. It is a

singular fact that electricity also so far exceeds the

normal rate as to double in value and quantity of

output and investment every five years. There is

perhaps more than ordinary coincidence in the as-

sociation of Edison with two such active departments

of progress.



As a purely manufacturing business the general

cement industry is one of even remote antiquity, and

if Edison had entered into it merely as a commercial

enterprise by following paths already so well

trodden, the fact would hardly have been worthy of

even passing notice. It is not in his nature, however,

to follow a beaten track except in regard to the

recognition of basic principles; so that while the

manufacture of Edison Portland cement embraces the

main essentials and familiar processes of cement-

making, such as crushing, drying, mixing, roasting,

and grinding, his versatility and originality, as

exemplified in the conception and introduction of some

bold and revolutionary methods and devices, have

resulted in raising his plant from the position of an

outsider to the rank of the fifth largest producer in

the United States, in the short space of five years

after starting to manufacture.



Long before his advent in cement production,

Edison had held very pronounced views on the value

of that material as the one which would obtain largely

for future building purposes on account of its stability.

More than twenty-five years ago one of the writers of

this narrative heard him remark during a discussion

on ancient buildings: "Wood will rot, stone will chip

and crumble, bricks disintegrate, but a cement and

iron structure is apparently indestructible. Look at

some of the old Roman baths. They are as solid as

when they were built." With such convictions, and

the vast fund of practical knowledge and experience

he had gained at Edison in the crushing and manipulation

of large masses of magnetic iron ore during the

preceding nine years, it is not surprising that on that

homeward railway journey, mentioned at the close

of the preceding chapter, he should have decided to

go into the manufacture of cement, especially in view

of the enormous growth of its use for structural purposes

during recent times.



The field being a new one to him, Edison followed

his usual course of reading up every page of

authoritative literature on the subject, and seeking

information from all quarters. In the mean time,

while he was busy also with his new storage battery,

Mr. Mallory, who had been hard at work on the

cement plan, announced that he had completed

arrangements for organizing a company with sufficient

financial backing to carry on the business; concluding

with the remark that it was now time to engage

engineers to lay out the plant. Edison replied

that he intended to do that himself, and invited Mr.

Mallory to go with him to one of the draughting-

rooms on an upper floor of the laboratory.



Here he placed a large sheet of paper on a draughting-

table, and immediately began to draw out a plan

of the proposed works, continuing all day and away

into the evening, when he finished; thus completing

within the twenty-four hours the full lay-out of the

entire plant as it was subsequently installed, and as

it has substantially remained in practical use to this

time. It will be granted that this was a remarkable

engineering feat, especially in view of the fact that

Edison was then a new-comer in the cement busi-

ness, and also that if the plant were to be rebuilt

to-day, no vital change would be desirable or

necessary. In that one day's planning every part

was considered and provided for, from the crusher to

the packing-house. From one end to the other, the

distance over which the plant stretches in length is

about half a mile, and through the various buildings

spread over this space there passes, automatically,

in course of treatment, a vast quantity of material

resulting in the production of upward of two and a

quarter million pounds of finished cement every

twenty-four hours, seven days in the week.



In that one day's designing provision was made not

only for all important parts, but minor details, such,

for instance, as the carrying of all steam, water, and

air pipes, and electrical conductors in a large subway

running from one end of the plant to the other; and,

an oiling system for the entire works. This latter

deserves special mention, not only because of its

arrangement for thorough lubrication, but also on

account of the resultant economy affecting the cost

of manufacture.



Edison has strong convictions on the liberal

use of lubricants, but argued that in the ordinary

oiling of machinery there is great waste, while much

dirt is conveyed into the bearings. He therefore

planned a system by which the ten thousand bearings

in the plant are oiled automatically; requiring the

services of only two men for the entire work. This

is accomplished by a central pumping and filtering

plant and the return of the oil from all parts of the

works by gravity. Every bearing is made dust-

proof, and is provided with two interior pipes. One

is above and the other below the bearing. The oil

flows in through the upper pipe, and, after lubricating

the shaft, flows out through the lower pipe back to

the pumping station, where any dirt is filtered out and

the oil returned to circulation. While this system of

oiling is not unique, it was the first instance of its

adaptation on so large and complete a scale, and

illustrates the far-sightedness of his plans.



In connection with the adoption of this lubricating

system there occurred another instance of his knowledge

of materials and intuitive insight into the nature

of things. He thought that too frequent circulation

of a comparatively small quantity of oil would, to

some extent, impair its lubricating qualities, and

requested his assistants to verify this opinion by

consultation with competent authorities. On making

inquiry of the engineers of the Standard Oil Company,

his theory was fully sustained. Hence, provision

was made for carrying a large stock of oil, and

for giving a certain period of rest to that already used.



A keen appreciation of ultimate success in the

production of a fine quality of cement led Edison to

provide very carefully in his original scheme for those

details that he foresaw would become requisite--such,

for instance, as ample stock capacity for raw materials

and their automatic delivery in the various stages of

manufacture, as well as mixing, weighing, and frequent

sampling and analyzing during the progress

through the mills. This provision even included the

details of the packing-house, and his perspicacity in

this case is well sustained from the fact that nine

years afterward, in anticipation of building an additional

packing-house, the company sent a representative

to different parts of the country to examine

the systems used by manufacturers in the packing of

large quantities of various staple commodities involving

somewhat similar problems, and found that

there was none better than that devised before the

cement plant was started. Hence, the order was

given to build the new packing-house on lines similar

to those of the old one.



Among the many innovations appearing in this

plant are two that stand out in bold relief as

indicating the large scale by which Edison measures

his ideas. One of these consists of the crushing and

grinding machinery, and the other of the long kilns.

In the preceding chapter there has been given a

description of the giant rolls, by means of which great

masses of rock, of which individual pieces may weigh

eight or more tons, are broken and reduced to about

a fourteen-inch size. The economy of this is apparent

when it is considered that in other cement plants

the limit of crushing ability is "one-man size"--that

is, pieces not too large for one man to lift.



The story of the kiln, as told by Mr. Mallory, is

illustrative of Edison's tendency to upset tradition

and make a radical departure from generally accepted

ideas. "When Mr. Edison first decided to go

into the cement business, it was on the basis of his

crushing-rolls and air separation, and he had every

expectation of installing duplicates of the kilns which

were then in common use for burning cement. These

kilns were usually made of boiler iron, riveted, and

were about sixty feet long and six feet in diameter,

and had a capacity of about two hundred barrels of

cement clinker in twenty-four hours.



"When the detail plans for our plant were being

drawn, Mr. Edison and I figured over the coal capacity

and coal economy of the sixty-foot kiln, and each

time thought that both could he materially bettered.

After having gone over this matter several times,

he said: `I believe I can make a kiln which will give

an output of one thousand barrels in twenty-four

hours.' Although I had then been closely associated

with him for ten years and was accustomed to see

him accomplish great things, I could not help feeling

the improbability of his being able to jump into an

old-established industry--as a novice--and start by

improving the `heart' of the production so as to

increase its capacity 400 per cent. When I pressed

him for an explanation, he was unable to give any

definite reasons, except that he felt positive it could

be done. In this connection let me say that very

many times I have heard Mr. Edison make predictions

as to what a certain mechanical device ought

to do in the way of output and costs, when his statements

did not seem to be even among the possibilities.

Subsequently, after more or less experience, these

predictions have been verified, and I cannot help coming

to the conclusion that he has a faculty, not possessed

by the average mortal, of intuitively and correctly

sizing up mechanical and commercial possibilities.



"But, returning to the kiln, Mr. Edison went to

work immediately and very soon completed the design

of a new type which was to be one hundred and

fifty feet long and nine feet in diameter, made up in

ten-foot sections of cast iron bolted together and

arranged to be revolved on fifteen bearings. He had

a wooden model made and studied it very carefully,

through a series of experiments. These resulted so

satisfactorily that this form was finally decided upon,

and ultimately installed as part of the plant.



"Well, for a year or so the kiln problem was a

nightmare to me. When we started up the plant

experimentally, and the long kiln was first put in

operation, an output of about four hundred barrels

in twenty-four hours was obtained. Mr. Edison was

more than disappointed at this result. His terse

comment on my report was: `Rotten. Try it again.'

When we became a little more familiar with the operation

of the kiln we were able to get the output up to

about five hundred and fifty barrels, and a little later

to six hundred and fifty barrels per day. I would

go down to Orange and report with a great deal of

satisfaction the increase in output, but Mr. Edison

would apparently be very much disappointed, and

often said to me that the trouble was not with the

kiln, but with our method of operating it; and he

would reiterate his first statement that it would

make one thousand barrels in twenty-four hours.



"Each time I would return to the plant with the

determination to increase the output if possible, and

we did increase it to seven hundred and fifty, then to

eight hundred and fifty barrels. Every time I reported

these increases Mr. Edison would still be disappointed.

I said to him several times that if he was

so sure the kiln could turn out one thousand barrels

in twenty-four hours we would be very glad to have

him tell us how to do it, and that we would run it

in any way he directed. He replied that he did not

know what it was that kept the output down, but he

was just as confident as ever that the kiln would

make one thousand barrels per day, and that if he

had time to work with and watch the kiln it would

not take him long to find out the reasons why. He

had made a number of suggestions throughout these

various trials, however, and, as we continued to

operate, we learned additional points in handling,

and were able to get the output up to nine hundred

barrels, then one thousand, and finally to over eleven

hundred barrels per day, thus more than realizing the

prediction made by Mr. Edison before even the plans

were drawn. It is only fair to say, however, that

prolonged experience has led us to the conclusion that

the maximum economy in continuous operation of

these kilns is obtained by working them at a little less

than their maximum capacity.



"It is interesting to note, in connection with the

Edison type of kiln, that when the older cement

manufacturers first learned of it, they ridiculed the

idea universally, and were not slow to predict our

early `finish' as cement manufacturers. The ultimate

success of the kiln, however, proved their criticisms

to be unwarranted. Once aware of its possibility,

some of the cement manufacturers proceeded to

avail themselves of the innovation (at first without

Mr. Edison's consent), and to-day more than one-half

of the Portland cement produced in this country is

made in kilns of the Edison type. Old plants are

lengthening their kilns wherever practicable, and no

wide-awake manufacturer building a modern plant

could afford to install other than these long kilns.

This invention of Mr. Edison has been recognized

by the larger cement manufacturers, and there is

every prospect now that the entire trade will take

licenses under his kiln patents."



When he decided to go into the cement business,

Edison was thoroughly awake to the fact that he

was proposing to "butt into" an old-established

industry, in which the principal manufacturers were

concerns of long standing. He appreciated fully its

inherent difficulties, not only in manufacture, but

also in the marketing of the product. These

considerations, together with his long-settled principle

of striving always to make the best, induced him

at the outset to study methods of producing the

highest quality of product. Thus he was led to

originate innovations in processes, some of which have

been preserved as trade secrets; but of the others

there are two deserving special notice--namely, the

accuracy of mixing and the fineness of grinding.



In cement-making, generally speaking, cement rock

and limestone in the rough are mixed together in such

relative quantities as may be determined upon in

advance by chemical analysis. In many plants this

mixture is made by barrow or load units, and may be

more or less accurate. Rule-of-thumb methods are

never acceptable to Edison, and he devised therefore

a system of weighing each part of the mixture,

so that it would be correct to a pound, and, even at

that, made the device "fool-proof," for as he observed

to one of his associates: "The man at the scales

might get to thinking of the other fellow's best girl,

so fifty or a hundred pounds of rock, more or less,

wouldn't make much difference to him." The Edison

checking plan embraces two hoppers suspended above

two platform scales whose beams are electrically

connected with a hopper-closing device by means of

needles dipping into mercury cups. The scales are

set according to the chemist's weighing orders, and

the material is fed into the scales from the hoppers.

The instant the beam tips, the connection is broken

and the feed stops instantly, thus rendering it impossible

to introduce any more material until the charge

has been unloaded.



The fine grinding of cement clinker is distinctively

Edisonian in both origin and application. As has

been already intimated, its author followed a thorough

course of reading on the subject long before reaching

the actual projection or installation of a plant, and

he had found all authorities to agree on one important

point--namely, that the value of cement depends

upon the fineness to which it is ground.[16] He also

ascertained that in the trade the standard of fineness

was that 75 per cent. of the whole mass would pass

through a 200-mesh screen. Having made some

improvements in his grinding and screening apparatus,

and believing that in the future engineers, builders,

and contractors would eventually require a higher

degree of fineness, he determined, in advance of

manufacturing, to raise the standard ten points, so that at

least 85 per cent. of his product should pass through

a 200-mesh screen. This was a bold step to be taken

by a new-comer, but his judgment, backed by a full

confidence in ability to live up to this standard, has

been fully justified in its continued maintenance,

despite the early incredulity of older manufacturers

as to the possibility of attaining such a high degree

of fineness.





[16] For a proper understanding and full appreciation of the

importance of fine grinding, it may be explained that Portland

cement (as manufactured in the Lehigh Valley) is made from

what is commonly spoken of as "cement rock," with the addition

of sufficient limestone to give the necessary amount of lime.

The rock is broken down and then ground to a fineness of 80 to

90 per cent. through a 200-mesh screen. This ground material

passes through kilns and comes out in "clinker." This is ground

and that part of this finely ground clinker that will pass a 200-

mesh screen is cement; the residue is still clinker. These coarse

particles, or clinkers, absorb water very slowly, are practically

inert, and have very feeble cementing properties. The residue

on a 200-mesh screen is useless.





If Edison measured his happiness, as men often

do, by merely commercial or pecuniary rewards of

success, it would seem almost redundant to state

that he has continued to manifest an intense interest

in the cement plant. Ordinarily, his interest as an

inventor wanes in proportion to the approach to mere

commercialism--in other words, the keenness of his

pleasure is in overcoming difficulties rather than the

mere piling up of a bank account. He is entirely

sensible of the advantages arising from a good balance

at the banker's, but that has not been the goal of his

ambition. Hence, although his cement enterprise

reached the commercial stage a long time ago, he has

been firmly convinced of his own ability to devise

still further improvements and economical processes

of greater or less fundamental importance, and has,

therefore, made a constant study of the problem as

a whole and in all its parts. By means of frequent

reports, aided by his remarkable memory, he keeps

in as close touch with the plant as if he were there in

person every day, and is thus enabled to suggest

improvement in any particular detail. The engineering

force has a great respect for the accuracy of his

knowledge of every part of the plant, for he remembers

the dimensions and details of each item of machinery,

sometimes to the discomfiture of those who

are around it every day.



A noteworthy instance of Edison's memory occurred

in connection with this cement plant. Some

years ago, as its installation was nearing completion,

he went up to look it over and satisfy himself as to

what needed to be done. On the arrival of the train

at 10.40 in the morning, he went to the mill, and,

with Mr. Mason, the general superintendent, started

at the crusher at one end, and examined every detail

all the way through to the packing-house at the other

end. He made neither notes nor memoranda, but

the examination required all the day, which happened

to be a Saturday. He took a train for home at 5.30

in the afternoon, and on arriving at his residence at

Orange, got out some note-books and began to write

entirely from memory each item consecutively. He

continued at this task all through Saturday night,

and worked steadily on until Sunday afternoon,

when he completed a list of nearly six hundred items.

The nature of this feat is more appreciable from

the fact that a large number of changes included

all the figures of new dimensions he had decided

upon for some of the machinery throughout the

plant.



As the reader may have a natural curiosity to learn

whether or not the list so made was practical, it may

be stated that it was copied and sent up to the general

superintendent with instructions to make the

modifications suggested, and report by numbers as

they were attended to. This was faithfully done, all

the changes being made before the plant was put into

operation. Subsequent experience has amply proven

the value of Edison's prescience at this time.



Although Edison's achievements in the way of improved

processes and machinery have already made a

deep impression in the cement industry, it is probable

that this impression will become still more profoundly

stamped upon it in the near future with the

exploitation of his "Poured Cement House." The

broad problem which he set himself was to provide

handsome and practically indestructible detached

houses, which could be taken by wage-earners at very

moderate monthly rentals. He turned this question

over in his mind for several years, and arrived at the

conclusion that a house cast in one piece would be

the answer. To produce such a house involved the

overcoming of many engineering and other technical

difficulties. These he attacked vigorously and disposed

of patiently one by one.



In this connection a short anecdote may be quoted

from Edison as indicative of one of the influences

turning his thoughts in this direction. In the story

of the ore-milling work, it has been noted that the

plant was shut down owing to the competition of

the cheap ore from the Mesaba Range. Edison says:

"When I shut down, the insurance companies cancelled

my insurance. I asked the reason why. `Oh,' they

said, `this thing is a failure. The moral risk is too

great.' `All right; I am glad to hear it. I will now

construct buildings that won't have any moral risk.'

I determined to go into the Portland cement business.

I organized a company and started cement-works

which have now been running successfully for several

years. I had so perfected the machinery in trying

to get my ore costs down that the making of cheap

cement was an easy matter to me. I built these

works entirely of concrete and steel, so that there is

not a wagon-load of lumber in them; and so that

the insurance companies would not have any possibility

of having any `moral risk.' Since that time

I have put up numerous factory buildings all of steel

and concrete, without any combustible whatever

about them--to avoid this `moral risk.' I am carrying

further the application of this idea in building

private houses for poor people, in which there will be

no `moral risk' at all--nothing whatever to burn,

not even by lightning."



As a casting necessitates a mold, together with a

mixture sufficiently fluid in its nature to fill all the

interstices completely, Edison devoted much attention

to an extensive series of experiments for producing

a free-flowing combination of necessary

materials. His proposition was against all precedent.

All expert testimony pointed to the fact that a mixture

of concrete (cement, sand, crushed stone, and

water) could not be made to flow freely to the small-

est parts of an intricate set of molds; that the heavy

parts of the mixture could not be held in suspension,

but would separate out by gravity and make an unevenly

balanced structure; that the surface would

be full of imperfections, etc.



Undeterred by the unanimity of adverse opinions,

however, he pursued his investigations with the

thorough minuteness that characterizes all his

laboratory work, and in due time produced a mixture

which on elaborate test overcame all objections and

answered the complex requirements perfectly,

including the making of a surface smooth, even, and

entirely waterproof. All the other engineering

problems have received study in like manner, and have

been overcome, until at the present writing the whole

question is practically solved and has been reduced

to actual practice. The Edison poured or cast cement

house may be reckoned as a reality.



The general scheme, briefly outlined, is to prepare

a model and plans of the house to be cast, and then

to design a set of molds in sections of convenient

size. When all is ready, these molds, which are of

cast iron with smooth interior surfaces, are taken to

the place where the house is to be erected. Here

there has been provided a solid concrete cellar floor,

technically called "footing." The molds are then

locked together so that they rest on this footing.

Hundreds of pieces are necessary for the complete

set. When they have been completely assembled, there

will be a hollow space in the interior, representing the

shape of the house. Reinforcing rods are also placed

in the molds, to be left behind in the finished house.



Next comes the pouring of the concrete mixture

into this form. Large mechanical mixers are used,

and, as it is made, the mixture is dumped into tanks,

from which it is conveyed to a distributing tank on

the top, or roof, of the form. From this tank a large

number of open troughs or pipes lead the mixture to

various openings in the roof, whence it flows down

and fills all parts of the mold from the footing in

the basement until it overflows at the tip of the

roof.



The pouring of the entire house is accomplished in

about six hours, and then the molds are left undisturbed

for six days, in order that the concrete may

set and harden. After that time the work of taking

away the molds is begun. This requires three or

four days. When the molds are taken away an entire

house is disclosed, cast in one piece, from cellar

to tip of roof, complete with floors, interior walls,

stairways, bath and laundry tubs, electric-wire

conduits, gas, water, and heating pipes. No plaster is

used anywhere; but the exterior and interior walls

are smooth and may be painted or tinted, if desired.

All that is now necessary is to put in the windows,

doors, heater, and lighting fixtures, and to connect

up the plumbing and heating arrangements, thus

making the house ready for occupancy.



As these iron molds are not ephemeral like the

wooden framing now used in cement construction, but

of practically illimitable life, it is obvious that they

can be used a great number of times. A complete

set of molds will cost approximately $25,000, while

the necessary plant will cost about $15,000 more.

It is proposed to work as a unit plant for successful

operation at least six sets of molds, to keep the men

busy and the machinery going. Any one, with a

sheet of paper, can ascertain the yearly interest on

the investment as a fixed charge to be assessed against

each house, on the basis that one hundred and forty-

four houses can be built in a year with the battery of

six sets of molds. Putting the sum at $175,000, and

the interest at 6 per cent. on the cost of the molds

and 4 per cent. for breakage, together with 6 per

cent. interest and 15 per cent. depreciation on

machinery, the plant charge is approximately $140

per house. It does not require a particularly acute

prophetic vision to see "Flower Towns" of "Poured

Houses" going up in whole suburbs outside all our

chief centres of population.



Edison's conception of the workingman's ideal

house has been a broad one from the very start. He

was not content merely to provide a roomy, moderately

priced house that should be fireproof, waterproof,

and vermin-proof, and practically indestructible, but

has been solicitous to get away from the idea of a

plain "packing-box" type. He has also provided for

ornamentation of a high class in designing the details

of the structure. As he expressed it: "We will

give the workingman and his family ornamentation

in their house. They deserve it, and besides, it costs

no more after the pattern is made to give decorative

effects than it would to make everything plain."

The plans have provided for a type of house that

would cost not far from $30,000 if built of cut stone.

He gave to Messrs. Mann & McNaillie, architects,

New York, his idea of the type of house he wanted.

On receiving these plans he changed them considerably,

and built a model. After making many more

changes in this while in the pattern shop, he produced

a house satisfactory to himself.



This one-family house has a floor plan twenty-five

by thirty feet, and is three stories high. The first

floor is divided off into two large rooms--parlor and

living-room--and the upper floors contain four large

bedrooms, a roomy bath-room, and wide halls. The

front porch extends eight feet, and the back porch

three feet. A cellar seven and a half feet high extends

under the whole house, and will contain the boiler,

wash-tubs, and coal-bunker. It is intended that the

house shall be built on lots forty by sixty feet, giving

a lawn and a small garden.



It is contemplated that these houses shall be built

in industrial communities, where they can be put up

in groups of several hundred. If erected in this manner,

and by an operator buying his materials in large

quantities, Edison believes that these houses can

be erected complete, including heating apparatus and

plumbing, for $1200 each. This figure would also rest

on the basis of using in the mixture the gravel

excavated on the site. Comment has been made by

persons of artistic taste on the monotony of a cluster

of houses exactly alike in appearance, but this

criticism has been anticipated, and the molds are so

made as to be capable of permutations of arrangement.

Thus it will be possible to introduce almost

endless changes in the style of house by variation of

the same set of molds.



For more than forty years Edison was avowedly

an inventor for purely commercial purposes; but

within the last two years he decided to retire from

that field so far as new inventions were concerned,

and to devote himself to scientific research and

experiment in the leisure hours that might remain after

continuing to improve his existing devices. But

although the poured cement house was planned during

the commercial period, the spirit in which it was

conceived arose out of an earnest desire to place within

the reach of the wage-earner an opportunity to better

his physical, pecuniary, and mental conditions in so

far as that could be done through the medium of

hygienic and beautiful homes at moderate rentals.

From the first Edison has declared that it was not

his intention to benefit pecuniarily through the

exploitation of this project. Having actually demonstrated

the practicability and feasibility of his plans,

he will allow responsible concerns to carry them into

practice under such limitations as may be necessary

to sustain the basic object, but without any payment

to him except for the actual expense incurred. The

hypercritical may cavil and say that, as a manufacturer

of cement, Edison will be benefited. True,

but as ANY good Portland cement can be used,

and no restrictions as to source of supply are enforced,

he, or rather his company, will be merely one

of many possible purveyors.



This invention is practically a gift to the workingmen

of the world and their families. The net result

will be that those who care to avail themselves of the

privilege may, sooner or later, forsake the crowded

apartment or tenement and be comfortably housed

in sanitary, substantial, and roomy homes fitted with

modern conveniences, and beautified by artistic

decorations, with no outlay for insurance or repairs; no

dread of fire, and all at a rental which Edison

believes will be not more, but probably less than, $10

per month in any city of the United States. While his

achievement in its present status will bring about

substantial and immediate benefits to wage-earners,

his thoughts have already travelled some years ahead

in the formulation of a still further beneficial project

looking toward the individual ownership of these

houses on a basis startling in its practical possibilities.


