




CHAPTER XXI



MOTION PICTURES



THE preceding chapters have treated of Edison in

various aspects as an inventor, some of which

are familiar to the public, others of which are believed

to be in the nature of a novel revelation, simply because

no one had taken the trouble before to put the

facts together. To those who have perhaps grown

weary of seeing Edison's name in articles of a sensational

character, it may sound strange to say that,

after all, justice has not been done to his versatile

and many-sided nature; and that the mere prosaic

facts of his actual achievement outrun the wildest

flights of irrelevant journalistic imagination. Edison

hates nothing more than to be dubbed a genius or

played up as a "wizard"; but this fate has dogged

him until he has come at last to resign himself to it

with a resentful indignation only to be appreciated

when watching him read the latest full-page Sunday

"spread" that develops a casual conversation into

oracular verbosity, and gives to his shrewd surmise

the cast of inspired prophecy.



In other words, Edison's real work has seldom been

seriously discussed. Rather has it been taken as a

point of departure into a realm of fancy and romance,

where as a relief from drudgery he is sometimes quite

willing to play the pipe if some one will dance to it.

Indeed, the stories woven around his casual suggestions

are tame and vapid alongside his own essays

in fiction, probably never to be published, but which

show what a real inventor can do when he cuts loose

to create a new heaven and a new earth, unrestrained

by any formal respect for existing conditions of servitude

to three dimensions and the standard elements.



The present chapter, essentially technical in its

subject-matter, is perhaps as significant as any in this

biography, because it presents Edison as the Master

Impresario of his age, and maybe of many following

ages also. His phonographs and his motion pictures

have more audiences in a week than all the theatres

in America in a year. The "Nickelodeon" is the central

fact in modern amusement, and Edison founded

it. All that millions know of music and drama he

furnishes; and the whole study of the theatrical managers

thus reaching the masses is not to ascertain the

limitations of the new art, but to discover its boundless

possibilities. None of the exuberant versions of

things Edison has not done could endure for a moment

with the simple narrative of what he has really done

as the world's new Purveyor of Pleasure. And yet

it all depends on the toilful conquest of a subtle and

intricate art. The story of the invention of the

phonograph has been told. That of the evolution

of motion pictures follows. It is all one piece of

sober, careful analysis, and stubborn, successful

attack on the problem.



The possibility of making a record of animate movement,

and subsequently reproducing it, was predicted

long before the actual accomplishment. This, as we

have seen, was also the case with the phonograph,

the telephone, and the electric light. As to the

phonograph, the prediction went only so far as the

RESULT; the apparent intricacy of the problem being

so great that the MEANS for accomplishing the desired

end were seemingly beyond the grasp of the imagination

or the mastery of invention.



With the electric light and the telephone the prediction

included not only the result to be accomplished,

but, in a rough and general way, the mechanism

itself; that is to say, long before a single sound

was intelligibly transmitted it was recognized that

such a thing might be done by causing a diaphragm,

vibrated by original sounds, to communicate its

movements to a distant diaphragm by a suitably

controlled electric current. In the case of the electric

light, the heating of a conductor to incandescence in

a highly rarefied atmosphere was suggested as a

scheme of illumination long before its actual

accomplishment, and in fact before the production of a

suitable generator for delivering electric current in a

satisfactory and economical manner.



It is a curious fact that while the modern art of

motion pictures depends essentially on the development

of instantaneous photography, the suggestion

of the possibility of securing a reproduction of animate

motion, as well as, in a general way, of the

mechanism for accomplishing the result, was made

many years before the instantaneous photograph became

possible. While the first motion picture was

not actually produced until the summer of 1889, its

real birth was almost a century earlier, when Plateau,

in France, constructed an optical toy, to which the

impressive name of "Phenakistoscope" was applied,

for producing an illusion of motion. This toy in turn

was the forerunner of the Zoetrope, or so-called

"Wheel of Life," which was introduced into this

country about the year 1845. These devices were

essentially toys, depending for their successful

operation (as is the case with motion pictures) upon a

physiological phenomenon known as persistence of

vision. If, for instance, a bright light is moved

rapidly in front of the eye in a dark room, it appears

not as an illuminated spark, but as a line of fire; a

so-called shooting star, or a flash of lightning produces

the same effect. This result is purely physiological,

and is due to the fact that the retina of the eye may

be considered as practically a sensitized plate of

relatively slow speed, and an image impressed upon it

remains, before being effaced, for a period of from

one-tenth to one-seventh of a second, varying according

to the idiosyncrasies of the individual and the intensity

of the light. When, therefore, it is said that

we should only believe things we actually see, we

ought to remember that in almost every instance we

never see things as they are.



Bearing in mind the fact that when an image is

impressed on the human retina it persists for an

appreciable period, varying as stated, with the

individual, and depending also upon the intensity of the

illumination, it will be seen that, if a number of pictures

or photographs are successively presented to the

eye, they will appear as a single, continuous photo-

graph, provided the periods between them are short

enough to prevent one of the photographs from being

effaced before its successor is presented. If, for

instance, a series of identical portraits were rapidly

presented to the eye, a single picture would apparently

be viewed, or if we presented to the eye the series

of photographs of a moving object, each one representing

a minute successive phase of the movement,

the movements themselves would apparently again

take place.



With the Zoetrope and similar toys rough drawings

were used for depicting a few broadly outlined

successive phases of movement, because in their day

instantaneous photography was unknown, and in addition

there were certain crudities of construction that

seriously interfered with the illumination of the pictures,

rendering it necessary to make them practically

as silhouettes on a very conspicuous background.

Hence it will be obvious that these toys produced

merely an ILLUSION of THEORETICAL motion.



But with the knowledge of even an illusion of

motion, and with the philosophy of persistence of

vision fully understood, it would seem that, upon the

development of instantaneous photography, the

reproduction of ACTUAL motion by means of pictures

would have followed, almost as a necessary consequence.

Yet such was not the case, and success was

ultimately accomplished by Edison only after

persistent experimenting along lines that could not

have been predicted, including the construction of

apparatus for the purpose, which, if it had not been

made, would undoubtedly be considered impossible.

In fact, if it were not for Edison's peculiar mentality,

that refuses to recognize anything as impossible until

indubitably demonstrated to be so, the production

of motion pictures would certainly have been delayed

for years, if not for all time.



One of the earliest suggestions of the possibility of

utilizing photography for exhibiting the illusion of

actual movement was made by Ducos, who, as early

as 1864, obtained a patent in France, in which he said:

"My invention consists in substituting rapidly and

without confusion to the eye not only of an individual,

but when so desired of a whole assemblage, the enlarged

images of a great number of pictures when taken

instantaneously and successively at very short

intervals.... The observer will believe that he sees

only one image, which changes gradually by reason of

the successive changes of form and position of the

objects which occur from one picture to the other.

Even supposing that there be a slight interval of

time during which the same object was not shown,

the persistence of the luminous impression upon the

eye will fill this gap. There will be as it were a living

representation of nature and . . . the same scene will

be reproduced upon the screen with the same degree

of animation.... By means of my apparatus I am

enabled especially to reproduce the passing of a

procession, a review of military manoeuvres, the

movements of a battle, a public fete, a theatrical scene,

the evolution or the dances of one or of several persons,

the changing expression of countenance, or, if

one desires, the grimaces of a human face; a marine

view, the motion of waves, the passage of clouds in

a stormy sky, particularly in a mountainous country,

the eruption of a volcano," etc.



Other dreamers, contemporaries of Ducos, made

similar suggestions; they recognized the scientific

possibility of the problem, but they were irretrievably

handicapped by the shortcomings of photography.

Even when substantially instantaneous photographs

were evolved at a somewhat later date they

were limited to the use of wet plates, which have

to be prepared by the photographer and used immediately,

and were therefore quite out of the question

for any practical commercial scheme. Besides

this, the use of plates would have been impracticable,

because the limitations of their weight and size would

have prevented the taking of a large number of pictures

at a high rate of speed, even if the sensitized

surface had been sufficiently rapid.



Nothing ever came of Ducos' suggestions and those

of the early dreamers in this essentially practical and

commercial art, and their ideas have made no greater

impress upon the final result than Jules Verne's

Nautilus of our boyhood days has developed the

modern submarine. From time to time further

suggestions were made, some in patents, and others in

photographic and scientific publications, all dealing

with the fascinating thought of preserving and

representing actual scenes and events. The first serious

attempt to secure an illusion of motion by photography

was made in 1878 by Eadward Muybridge as a result

of a wager with the late Senator Leland Stanford,

the California pioneer and horse-lover, who had

asserted, contrary to the usual belief, that a trotting-

horse at one point in its gait left the ground entirely.

At this time wet plates of very great rapidity were

known, and by arranging a series of cameras along

the line of a track and causing the horse in trotting

past them, by striking wires or strings attached to the

shutters, to actuate the cameras at the right instant,

a series of very clear instantaneous photographs was

obtained. From these negatives, when developed,

positive prints were made, which were later mounted

on a modified form of Zoetrope and projected upon

a screen.



One of these early exhibitions is described in the

Scientific American of June 5, 1880: "While the

separate photographs had shown the successive positions

of a trotting or running horse in making a

single stride, the Zoogyroscope threw upon the screen

apparently the living animal. Nothing was wanting

but the clatter of hoofs upon the turf, and an occasional

breath of steam from the nostrils, to make the

spectator believe that he had before him genuine

flesh-and-blood steeds. In the views of hurdle-leaping,

the simulation was still more admirable, even

to the motion of the tail as the animal gathered for

the jump, the raising of his head, all were there.

Views of an ox trotting, a wild bull on the charge,

greyhounds and deer running and birds flying in mid-

air were shown, also athletes in various positions."

It must not be assumed from this statement that

even as late as the work of Muybridge anything like

a true illusion of movement had been obtained, because

such was not the case. Muybridge secured

only one cycle of movement, because a separate

camera had to be used for each photograph and

consequently each cycle was reproduced over and

over again. To have made photographs of a trotting-

horse for one minute at the moderate rate of twelve

per second would have required, under the Muybridge

scheme, seven hundred and twenty separate cameras,

whereas with the modern art only a single camera is

used. A further defect with the Muybridge pictures

was that since each photograph was secured when

the moving object was in the centre of the plate, the

reproduction showed the object always centrally on

the screen with its arms or legs in violent movement,

but not making any progress, and with the scenery

rushing wildly across the field of view!



In the early 80's the dry plate was first introduced

into general use, and from that time onward its rapidity

and quality were gradually improved; so much

so that after 1882 Prof. E. J. Marey, of the French

Academy, who in 1874 had published a well-known

treatise on "Animal Movement," was able by the

use of dry plates to carry forward the experiments of

Muybridge on a greatly refined scale. Marey was,

however, handicapped by reason of the fact that glass

plates were still used, although he was able with

a single camera to obtain twelve photographs on

successive plates in the space of one second. Marey,

like Muybridge, photographed only one cycle of the

movements of a single object, which was subsequently

reproduced over and over again, and the

camera was in the form of a gun, which could follow

the object so that the successive pictures would be

always located in the centre of the plates.



The review above given, as briefly as possible,

comprises substantially the sum of the world's

knowledge at the time the problem of recording and

reproducing animate movement was first undertaken

by Edison. The most that could be said of the

condition of the art when Edison entered the field was

that it had been recognized that if a series of

instantaneous photographs of a moving object could

be secured at an enormously high rate many times

per second--they might be passed before the eye

either directly or by projection upon a screen, and

thereby result in a reproduction of the movements.

Two very serious difficulties lay in the way of actual

accomplishment, however--first, the production of a

sensitive surface in such form and weight as to be

capable of being successively brought into position

and exposed, at the necessarily high rate; and, second,

the production of a camera capable of so taking

the pictures. There were numerous other workers

in the field, but they added nothing to what had already

been proposed. Edison himself knew nothing

of Ducos, or that the suggestions had advanced beyond

the single centrally located photographs of

Muybridge and Marey. As a matter of public policy,

the law presumes that an inventor must be familiar

with all that has gone before in the field within which

he is working, and if a suggestion is limited to a patent

granted in New South Wales, or is described in a

single publication in Brazil, an inventor in America,

engaged in the same field of thought, is by legal fiction

presumed to have knowledge not only of the existence

of that patent or publication, but of its contents.

We say this not in the way of an apology for the

extent of Edison's contribution to the motion-picture

art, because there can be no question that he was as

much the creator of that art as he was of the phonographic

art; but to show that in a practical sense the

suggestion of the art itself was original with him. He

himself says: "In the year 1887 the idea occurred

to me that it was possible to devise an instrument

which should do for the eye what the phonograph

does for the ear, and that by a combination of the

two, all motion and sound could be recorded and

reproduced simultaneously. This idea, the germ of

which came from the little toy called the Zoetrope

and the work of Muybridge, Marey, and others, has

now been accomplished, so that every change of

facial expression can be recorded and reproduced life-

size. The kinetoscope is only a small model illustrating

the present stage of the progress, but with

each succeeding month new possibilities are brought

into view. I believe that in coming years, by my

own work and that of Dickson, Muybridge, Marey,

and others who will doubtless enter the field, grand

opera can be given at the Metropolitan Opera House

at New York without any material change from the

original, and with artists and musicians long since

dead."



In the earliest experiments attempts were made

to secure the photographs, reduced microscopically,

arranged spirally on a cylinder about the size of a

phonograph record, and coated with a highly sensitized

surface, the cylinder being given an intermittent

movement, so as to be at rest during each

exposure. Reproductions were obtained in the same

way, positive prints being observed through a

magnifying glass. Various forms of apparatus following

this general type were made, but they were all open

to the serious objection that the very rapid emulsions

employed were relatively coarse-grained and prevented

the securing of sharp pictures of microscopic

size. On the other hand, the enlarging of the

apparatus to permit larger pictures to be obtained

would present too much weight to be stopped and

started with the requisite rapidity. In these early

experiments, however, it was recognized that, to

secure proper results, a single camera should be used,

so that the objects might move across its field just

as they move across the field of the human eye; and

the important fact was also observed that the rate

at which persistence of vision took place represented

the minimum speed at which the pictures should be

obtained. If, for instance, five pictures per second

were taken (half of the time being occupied in

exposure and the other half in moving the exposed

portion of the film out of the field of the lens and

bringing a new portion into its place), and the same ratio

is observed in exhibiting the pictures, the interval of

time between successive pictures would be one-tenth

of a second; and for a normal eye such an exhibition

would present a substantially continuous photograph.

If the angular movement of the object across the field

is very slow, as, for instance, a distant vessel, the

successive positions of the object are so nearly coincident

that when reproduced before the eye an impression

of smooth, continuous movement is secured. If, how-

ever, the object is moving rapidly across the field of

view, one picture will be separated from its successor

to a marked extent, and the resulting impression will

be jerky and unnatural. Recognizing this fact, Edison

always sought for a very high speed, so as to give

smooth and natural reproductions, and even with his

experimental apparatus obtained upward of forty-

eight pictures per second, whereas, in practice, at the

present time, the accepted rate varies between twenty

and thirty per second. In the efforts of the present

day to economize space by using a minimum length

of film, pictures are frequently taken at too slow a

rate, and the reproductions are therefore often

objectionable, by reason of more or less jerkiness.



During the experimental period and up to the early

part of 1889, the kodak film was being slowly

developed by the Eastman Kodak Company. Edison

perceived in this product the solution of the problem

on which he had been working, because the film presented

a very light body of tough material on which

relatively large photographs could be taken at rapid

intervals. The surface, however, was not at first

sufficiently sensitive to admit of sharply defined

pictures being secured at the necessarily high rates.

It seemed apparent, therefore, that in order to obtain

the desired speed there would have to be sacrificed

that fineness of emulsion necessary for the securing

of sharp pictures. But as was subsequently seen,

this sacrifice was in time rendered unnecessary.

Much credit is due the Eastman experts--stimulated

and encouraged by Edison, but independently of

him--for the production at last of a highly sensitized,

fine-grained emulsion presenting the highly sensitized

surface that Edison sought.



Having at last obtained apparently the proper

material upon which to secure the photographs, the

problem then remained to devise an apparatus by

means of which from twenty to forty pictures per

second could be taken; the film being stationary

during the exposure and, upon the closing of the

shutter, being moved to present a fresh surface. In

connection with this problem it is interesting to note

that this question of high speed was apparently regarded

by all Edison's predecessors as the crucial

point. Ducos, for example, expended a great deal

of useless ingenuity in devising a camera by means

of which a tape-line film could receive the photographs

while being in continuous movement, necessitating

the use of a series of moving lenses. Another

experimenter, Dumont, made use of a single large

plate and a great number of lenses which were

successively exposed. Muybridge, as we have seen,

used a series of cameras, one for each plate. Marey

was limited to a very few photographs, because the

entire surface had to be stopped and started in

connection with each exposure.



After the accomplishment of the fact, it would seem

to be the obvious thing to use a single lens and move

the sensitized film with respect to it, intermittently

bringing the surface to rest, then exposing it, then

cutting off the light and moving the surface to a

fresh position; but who, other than Edison, would

assume that such a device could be made to repeat

these movements over and over again at the rate of

twenty to forty per second? Users of kodaks and

other forms of film cameras will appreciate perhaps

better than others the difficulties of the problem,

because in their work, after an exposure, they have

to advance the film forward painfully to the extent of

the next picture before another exposure can take

place, these operations permitting of speeds of but a

few pictures per minute at best. Edison's solution of

the problem involved the production of a kodak in

which from twenty to forty pictures should be taken

IN EACH SECOND, and with such fineness of adjustment

that each should exactly coincide with its predecessors

even when subjected to the test of enlargement by

projection. This, however, was finally accomplished,

and in the summer of 1889 the first modern motion-

picture camera was made. More than this, the

mechanism for operating the film was so constructed

that the movement of the film took place in one-

tenth of the time required for the exposure, giving

the film an opportunity to come to rest prior to the

opening of the shutter. From that day to this the

Edison camera has been the accepted standard for

securing pictures of objects in motion, and such

changes as have been made in it have been purely

in the nature of detail mechanical refinements.



The earliest form of exhibiting apparatus, known

as the Kinetoscope, was a machine in which a positive

print from the negative obtained in the camera

was exhibited directly to the eye through a peep-

hole; but in 1895 the films were applied to modified

forms of magic lanterns, by which the images are

projected upon a screen. Since that date the industry

has developed very rapidly, and at the present time

(1910) all of the principal American manufacturers

of motion pictures are paying a royalty to Edison

under his basic patents.



From the early days of pictures representing simple

movements, such as a man sneezing, or a skirt-dance,

there has been a gradual evolution, until now the

pictures represent not only actual events in all their

palpitating instantaneity, but highly developed dramas

and scenarios enacted in large, well-equipped

glass studios, and the result of infinite pains and

expense of production. These pictures are exhibited

in upward of eight thousand places of amusement in

the United States, and are witnessed by millions of

people each year. They constitute a cheap, clean

form of amusement for many persons who cannot

spare the money to go to the ordinary theatres, or

they may be exhibited in towns that are too small

to support a theatre. More than this, they offer to

the poor man an effective substitute for the saloon.

Probably no invention ever made has afforded more

pleasure and entertainment than the motion picture.



Aside from the development of the motion picture

as a spectacle, there has gone on an evolution in its

use for educational purposes of wide range, which

must not be overlooked. In fact, this form of utilization

has been carried further in Europe than in this

country as a means of demonstration in the arts and

sciences. One may study animal life, watch a surgical

operation, follow the movement of machinery,

take lessons in facial expression or in calisthenics.

It seems a pity that in motion pictures should at last

have been found the only competition that the ancient

marionettes cannot withstand. But aside from

the disappearance of those entertaining puppets, all

else is gain in the creation of this new art.



The work at the Edison laboratory in the development

of the motion picture was as usual intense and

concentrated, and, as might be expected, many of

the early experiments were quite primitive in their

character until command had been secured of relatively

perfect apparatus. The subjects registered

jerkily by the films were crude and amusing, such as

of Fred Ott's sneeze, Carmencita dancing, Italians

and their performing bears, fencing, trapeze stunts,

horsemanship, blacksmithing--just simple movements

without any attempt to portray the silent drama.

One curious incident of this early study occurred

when "Jim" Corbett was asked to box a few rounds

in front of the camera, with a "dark un" to be selected

locally. This was agreed to, and a celebrated

bruiser was brought over from Newark. When this

"sparring partner" came to face Corbett in the imitation

ring he was so paralyzed with terror he could

hardly move. It was just after Corbett had won

one of his big battles as a prize-fighter, and the dismay

of his opponent was excusable. The "boys" at the

laboratory still laugh consumedly when they tell

about it.



The first motion-picture studio was dubbed by the

staff the "Black Maria." It was an unpretentious

oblong wooden structure erected in the laboratory

yard, and had a movable roof in the central part.

This roof could be raised or lowered at will. The

building was covered with black roofing paper, and

was also painted black inside. There was no scenery

to render gay this lugubrious environment, but the

black interior served as the common background for

the performers, throwing all their actions into high

relief. The whole structure was set on a pivot so

that it could be swung around with the sun; and

the movable roof was opened so that the accentuating

sunlight could stream in upon the actor whose

gesticulations were being caught by the camera.

These beginnings and crudities are very remote from

the elaborate and expensive paraphernalia and machinery

with which the art is furnished to-day.



At the present time the studios in which motion

pictures are taken are expensive and pretentious

affairs. An immense building of glass, with all the

properties and stage-settings of a regular theatre,

is required. The Bronx Park studio of the Edison

company cost at least one hundred thousand dollars,

while the well-known house of Pathe Freres in

France--one of Edison's licensees--makes use of no

fewer than seven of these glass theatres. All of the

larger producers of pictures in this country and

abroad employ regular stock companies of actors,

men and women selected especially for their skill in

pantomime, although, as most observers have perhaps

suspected, in the actual taking of the pictures the

performers are required to carry on an animated and

prepared dialogue with the same spirit and animation

as on the regular stage. Before setting out on

the preparation of a picture, the book is first written

--known in the business as a scenario--giving a

complete statement as to the scenery, drops and

background, and the sequence of events, divided into

scenes as in an ordinary play. These are placed in

the hands of a "producer," corresponding to a stage-

director, generally an actor or theatrical man of

experience, with a highly developed dramatic instinct.

The various actors are selected, parts are assigned,

and the scene-painters are set to work on the production

of the desired scenery. Before the photographing

of a scene, a long series of rehearsals takes

place, the incidents being gone over and over again

until the actors are "letter perfect." So persistent

are the producers in the matter of rehearsals and the

refining and elaboration of details, that frequently

a picture that may be actually photographed and

reproduced in fifteen minutes, may require two or

three weeks for its production. After the rehearsal

of a scene has advanced sufficiently to suit the

critical requirements of the producer, the camera

man is in requisition, and he is consulted as to lighting

so as to produce the required photographic effect.

Preferably, of course, sunlight is used whenever

possible, hence the glass studios; but on dark days, and

when night-work is necessary, artificial light of

enormous candle-power is used, either mercury arcs or

ordinary arc lights of great size and number.



Under all conditions the light is properly screened

and diffused to suit the critical eye of the camera

man. All being in readiness, the actual picture is

taken, the actors going through their rehearsed parts,

the producer standing out of the range of the camera,

and with a megaphone to his lips yelling out his

instructions, imprecations, and approval, and the

camera man grinding at the crank of the camera and

securing the pictures at the rate of twenty or more

per second, making a faithful and permanent record

of every movement and every change of facial

expression. At the end of the scene the negative is

developed in the ordinary way, and is then ready for

use in the printing of the positives for sale. When a

further scene in the play takes place in the same

setting, and without regard to its position in the

plot, it is taken up, rehearsed, and photographed in

the same way, and afterward all the scenes are

cemented together in the proper sequence, and form

the complete negative. Frequently, therefore, in the

production of a motion-picture play, the first and the

last scene may be taken successively, the only thing

necessary being, of course, that after all is done the

various scenes should be arranged in their proper

order. The frames, having served their purpose, now

go back to the scene-painter for further use. All

pictures are not taken in studios, because when light

and weather permit and proper surroundings can be

secured outside, scenes can best be obtained with

natural scenery--city streets, woods, and fields. The

great drawback to the taking of pictures out-of-doors,

however, is the inevitable crowd, attracted by the

novelty of the proceedings, which makes the camera

man's life a torment by getting into the field of his

instrument. The crowds are patient, however, and

in one Edison picture involving the blowing up of a

bridge by the villain of the piece and the substitution

of a pontoon bridge by a company of engineers just

in time to allow the heroine to pass over in her

automobile, more than a thousand people stood around

for almost an entire day waiting for the tedious

rehearsals to end and the actual performance to begin.

Frequently large bodies of men are used in pictures,

such as troops of soldiers, and it is an open secret that

for weeks during the Boer War regularly equipped

British and Boer armies confronted each other on the

peaceful hills of Orange, New Jersey, ready to enact

before the camera the stirring events told by the

cable from the seat of hostilities. These conflicts

were essentially harmless, except in one case during

the battle of Spion Kopje, when "General Cronje,"

in his efforts to fire a wooden cannon, inadvertently

dropped his fuse into a large glass bottle containing

gunpowder. The effect was certainly most dramatic,

and created great enthusiasm among the many audiences

which viewed the completed production; but

the unfortunate general, who is still an employee, was

taken to the hospital, and even now, twelve years

afterward, he says with a grin that whenever he has

a moment of leisure he takes the time to pick a few

pieces of glass from his person!



Edison's great contribution to the regular stage

was the incandescent electric lamp, which enabled

the production of scenic effects never before even

dreamed of, but which we accept now with so much

complacency. Yet with the motion picture, effects

are secured that could not be reproduced to the

slightest extent on the real stage. The villain, overcome

by a remorseful conscience, sees on the wall of

the room the very crime which he committed, with

HIMSELF as the principal actor; one of the easy effects

of double exposure. The substantial and ofttimes

corpulent ghost or spirit of the real stage has been

succeeded by an intangible wraith, as transparent

and unsubstantial as may be demanded in the best

book of fairy tales--more double exposure. A man

emerges from the water with a splash, ascends feet

foremost ten yards or more, makes a graceful curve

and lands on a spring-board, runs down it to the bank,

and his clothes fly gently up from the ground and

enclose his person--all unthinkable in real life, but

readily possible by running the motion-picture film

backward! The fairy prince commands the princess

to appear, consigns the bad brothers to instant

annihilation, turns the witch into a cat, confers life

on inanimate things; and many more startling and

apparently incomprehensible effects are carried out

with actual reality, by stop-work photography. In

one case, when the command for the heroine to come

forth is given, the camera is stopped, the young

woman walks to the desired spot, and the camera is

again started; the effect to the eye--not knowing of

this little by-play--is as if she had instantly appeared

from space. The other effects are perhaps obvious,

and the field and opportunities are absolutely

unlimited. Other curious effects are secured by taking

the pictures at a different speed from that at which

they are exhibited. If, for example, a scene occupying

thirty seconds is reproduced in ten seconds, the

movements will be three times as fast, and vice

versa. Many scenes familiar to the reader, showing

automobiles tearing along the road and rounding

corners at an apparently reckless speed, are really

pictures of slow and dignified movements reproduced

at a high speed.



Brief reference has been made to motion pictures

of educational subjects, and in this field there are

very great opportunities for development. The study

of geography, scenes and incidents in foreign countries,

showing the lives and customs and surroundings

of other peoples, is obviously more entertaining

to the child when actively depicted on the screen

than when merely described in words. The lives of

great men, the enacting of important historical

events, the reproduction of great works of literature,

if visually presented to the child must necessarily

impress his mind with greater force than if shown

by mere words. We predict that the time is not

far distant when, in many of our public schools, two

or three hours a week will be devoted to this rational

and effective form of education.



By applying microphotography to motion pictures

an additional field is opened up, one phase of

which may be the study of germ life and bacteria,

so that our future medical students may become as

familiar with the habits and customs of the Anthrax

bacillus, for example, as of the domestic cat.



From whatever point of view the subject is approached,

the fact remains that in the motion picture,

perhaps more than with any other invention, Edison

has created an art that must always make a special

appeal to the mind and emotions of men, and although

so far it has not advanced much beyond the

field of amusement, it contains enormous possibilities

for serious development in the future. Let us not

think too lightly of the humble five-cent theatre with

its gaping crowd following with breathless interest

the vicissitudes of the beautiful heroine. Before us

lies an undeveloped land of opportunity which is

destined to play an important part in the growth

and welfare of the human race.


