


Ancient Law
by Henry Maine

Chapter 8

The Early History of Property

    The Roman Institutional Treatises, after giving their
definition of the various forms and modifications of ownership,
proceed to discuss the Natural Modes of Acquiring Property. Those
who are unfamiliar with the history of jurisprudence are not
likely to look upon these "natural modes" of acquisition as
possessing, at first sight, either much speculative or much
practical interest. The wild animal which is snared or killed by
the hunter, the soil which is added to our field by the
imperceptible deposits of a river, the tree which strikes its
roots into our ground, are each said by the Roman lawyers to be
acquired by us naturally. The older jurisconsults had doubtless
observed that such acquisitions were universally sanctioned by
the usages of the little societies around them, and thus the
lawyers of a later age, finding them classed in the ancient Jus
Gentium, and perceiving them to be of the simplest description,
allotted them a place among the ordinances of Nature. The dignity
with which they were invested has gone on increasing in modern
times till it is quite out of proportion to their original
importance. Theory has made them its favourite food, and has
enabled them to exercise the most serious influence on practice. 
    It will be necessary for us to attend to one only among these
"natural modes of acquisition," Occupatio or Occupancy. Occupancy
is the advisedly taking possession of that which at the moment is
the property of no man, with the view (adds the technical
definition) of acquiring property in it for yourself. The objects
which the Roman lawyers called res nullius  -- things which have
not or have never had an owner -- can only be ascertained by
enumerating them. Among things which never had an owner are wild
animals, fishes, wild fowl, jewels disinterred for the first
time, and lands newly discovered or never before cultivated.
Among things which have not an owner are moveables which have
been abandoned, lands which have been deserted, and (an anomalous
but most formidable item) the property of an enemy. In all these
objects the full rights of dominion were acquired by the
Occupant, who first took possession of them with the intention of
keeping them as his own -- an intention which, in certain cases,
had to be manifested by specific acts. It is not difficult, I
think, to understand the universality which caused the practice
of Occupancy to be placed by one generation of Roman lawyers in
the Law common to all Nations, and the simplicity which
occasioned its being attributed by another to the Law of Nature.
But for its fortunes in modern legal history we are less prepared
by a priori considerations. The Roman principle of Occupancy, and
the rules into which the jurisconsults expanded it, are the
source of all modern International Law on the subject of Capture
in War and of the acquisition of sovereign rights in newly
discovered countries. They have also supplied a theory of the
Origin of Property, which is at once the popular theory, and the
theory which, in one form or another, is acquiesced in by the
great majority of speculative jurists. 
    I have said that the Roman principle of Occupancy has
determined the tenor of that chapter of International Law which
is concerned with Capture in War. The Law of Warlike Capture
derives its rules from the assumption that communities are
remitted to a state of nature by the outbreak of hostilities, and
that, in the artificial natural condition thus produced, the
institution of private property falls into abeyance so far as
concerns the belligerents. As the later writers on the Law of
Nature have always been anxious to maintain that private property
was in some sense sanctioned by the system which they were
expounding, the hypothesis that an enemy's property is res
nullius has seemed to them perverse and shocking, and they are
careful to stigmatise it as a mere fiction of jurisprudence. But,
as soon as the Law of Nature is traced to its source in the Jus
Gentium, we see at once how the goods of an enemy came to be
looked upon as nobody's property, and therefore as capable of
being acquired by the first occupant. The idea would occur
spontaneously to persons practising the ancient forms of Warfare,
when victory dissolved the organisation of the conquering army
and dismissed the soldiers to indiscriminate plunder. It is
probable, however, that originally it was only moveable property
which was thus permitted to be acquired by the Captor. We know on
independent authority that a very different rule prevailed in
ancient Italy as to the acquisition of ownership in the soil of a
conquered country, and we may therefore suspect that the
application of the principle of occupancy to land (always a
matter of difficulty) dates from the period when the Jus Gentium
was becoming the Code of Nature, and that it is the result of a
generalisation effected by the jurisconsults of the golden age.
Their dogmas on the point are preserved in the Pandects of
Justinian, and amount to an unqualified assertion that enemy's
property of every sort is res nullius to the other belligerent,
and that Occupancy, by which the Captor makes them his own, is an
institution of Natural Law. The rules which International
jurisprudence derives from these positions have sometimes been
stigmatised as needlessly indulgent to the ferocity and cupidity
of combatants, but the charge has been made, I think, by persons
who are unacquainted with the history of wars, and who are
consequently ignorant how great an exploit it is to command
obedience for a rule of any kind. The Roman principle of
Occupancy, when it was admitted into the modern law of Capture in
War, drew with it a number of subordinate canons, limiting and
giving precision to its operation, and if the contests which have
been waged since the treatise of Grotius became an authority, are
compared with those of an earlier date, it will be seen that, as
soon as the Roman maxims were received, Warfare instantly assumed
a more tolerable complexion. If the Roman law of Occupancy is to
be taxed with having had pernicious influence on any part of the
modern Law of Nations, there is another chapter in it which may
be said, with some reason, to have been injuriously affected. In
applying to the discovery of new countries the same principles
which the Romans had applied to the finding of a jewel, the
Publicists forced into their service a doctrine altogether
unequal to the task expected from it. Elevated into extreme
importance by the discoveries of the great navigator of the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, it raised more disputes than
it solved. The greatest uncertainty was very shortly found to
exist on the very two points on which certainty was most
required, the extent of the territory which was acquired for his
sovereign by the discoverer, and the nature of the acts which
were necessary to complete the ad prehensio or assumption of
sovereign possession. Moreover, the principle itself, conferring
as it did such enormous advantages as the consequence of a piece
of good luck, was instinctively mutinied against by some of the
most adventurous nations in Europe, the Dutch, the English, and
the Portuguese. Our own countrymen, without expressly denying the
rule of International Law, never did, in practice, admit the
claim of the Spaniards to engross the whole of America south of
the Gulf of Mexico, or that of the King of France to monopolise
the valleys of the Ohio and the Mississippi. From the accession
of Elizabeth to the accession of Charles the Second, it cannot be
said that there was at any time thorough peace in the American
waters, and the encroachments of the New England Colonists on the
territory of the French King continued for almost a century
longer. Bentham was so struck with the confusion attending the
application of the legal principle, that he went out of his way
to eulogise the famous Bull of Pope Alexander the Sixth, dividing
the undiscovered countries of the world between the Spaniards and
Portuguese by a line drawn one hundred leagues West of the
Azores; and, grotesque as his praises may appear at first sight,
it may be doubted whether the arrangement of Pope Alexander is
absurder in principle than the rule of Public law, which gave
half a continent to the monarch whose servants had fulfilled the
conditions required by Roman jurisprudence for the acquisition of
property in a valuable object which could be covered by the hand.

    To all who pursue the inquiries which are the subject of this
volume Occupancy is pre-eminently interesting on the score of the
service it has been made to perform for speculative
jurisprudence, in furnishing a supposed explanation of the origin
of private property It was once universally believed that the
proceeding implied in Occupancy was identical with the process by
which the earth and its fruits, which were at first in common,
became the allowed property of individuals. The course of thought
which led to this assumption is not difficult to understand, if
we seize the shade of difference which separates the ancient from
the modern conception of Natural Law. The Roman lawyers had laid
down that Occupancy was one of the Natural modes of acquiring
property, and they undoubtedly believed that, were mankind living
under the institutions of Nature, Occupancy would be one of their
practices. How far they persuaded themselves that such a
condition of the race had ever existed, is a point, as I have
already stated, which their language leaves in much uncertainty;
but they certainly do seem to have made the conjecture, which has
at all times possessed much plausibility, that the institution of
property was not so old as the existence of mankind. Modem
jurisprudence, accepting all their dogmas without reservation,
went far beyond them in the eager curiosity with which it dwelt
on the supposed state of Nature. Since then it had received the
position that the earth and its fruits were once res nullius, and
since its peculiar view of Nature led it to assume without
hesitation that the human race had actually practised the
Occupancy of res nullius long before the organisation of civil
societies, the inference immediately suggested itself that
Occupancy was the process by which the "no man's goods" of the
primitive world became the private property of individuals in the
world of history. It would be wearisome to enumerate the jurists
who have subscribed to this theory in one shape or another, and
it is the less necessary to attempt it because Blackstone, who is
always a faithful index of the average opinions of his day, has
summed them up in his 2nd book and 1st chapter. 
    "The earth," he writes, "and all things therein were the
general property of mankind from the immediate gift of the
Creator. Not that the communion of goods seems ever to have been
applicable, even in the earliest ages, to aught but the substance
of the thing; nor could be extended to the use of it. For, by the
law of nature and reason he who first began to use it acquired
therein a kind of transient property that lasted so long as he
was using it, and no longer; or to speak with greater precision,
the right of possession continued for the same time only that the
act of possession lasted. Thus the ground was in common, and no
part was the permanent property of any man in particular; yet
whoever was in the occupation of any determined spot of it, for
rest, for shade, or the like, acquired for the time a sort of
ownership, from which it would have been unjust and contrary to
the law of nature to have driven him by force, but the instant
that he quitted the use of occupation of it, another might seize
it without injustice." He then proceeds to argue that "when
mankind increased in number, it became necessary to entertain
conceptions of more permanent dominion, and to appropriate to
individuals not the immediate use only, but the very substance of
the thing to be used."
    Some ambiguities of expression in this passage lead to the
suspicion that Blackstone did not quite understand the meaning of
the proposition which he found in his authorities, that property
in the earth's surface was first acquired, under the law of
Nature, by the occupant; but the limitation which designedly or
through misapprehension he has imposed on the theory brings it
into a form which it has not infrequently assumed. Many writers
more famous than Blackstone for precision of language have laid
down that, in the beginning of things, Occupancy first gave a
right against the world to an exclusive but temporary enjoyment,
and that afterwards this right, while it remained exclusive,
became perpetual. Their object in so stating their theory was to
reconcile the doctrine that in the state of Nature res nullius
became property through Occupancy, with the inference which they
drew from the Scriptural history that the Patriarchs did not at
first permanently appropriate the soil which had been grazed over
by their flocks and herds. 
    The only criticism which could be directly applied to the
theory of Blackstone would consist in inquiring whether the
circumstances which make up his picture of a primitive society
are more or less probable than other incidents which could be
imagined with equal readiness. Pursuing this method of
examination, we might fairly ask whether the man who had occupied
(Blackstone evidently uses this word with its ordinary English
meaning) a particular spot of ground for rest or shade would be
permitted to retain it without disturbance. The chances surely
are that his right to possession would be exactly coextensive
with his power to keep it, and that he would be constantly liable
to disturbance by the first comer who coveted the spot and
thought himself strong enough to drive away the possessor. But
the truth is that all such cavil at these positions is perfectly
idle from the very baselessness of the positions themselves. What
mankind did in the primitive state may not be a hopeless subject
of inquiry, but of their motives for doing it it is impossible to
know anything. These sketches of the plight of human beings in
the first ages of the world are effected by first supposing
mankind to be divested of a great part of the circumstances by
which they are now surrounded, and by then assuming that, in the
condition thus imagined, they would preserve the same sentiments
and prejudices by which they are now actuated, -- although, in
fact, these sentiments may have been created and engendered by
those very circumstances of which, by the hypothesis, they are to
be stripped. 
    There is an aphorism of Savigny which has been sometimes
thought to countenance a view of the origin of property somewhat
similar to the theories epitomised by Blackstone. The great
German jurist has laid down that all Property is founded on
Adverse Possession ripened by Prescription. It is only with
respect to Roman law that Savigny makes this statement, and
before it can fully be appreciated much labour must be expended
in explaining and defining the expressions employed. His meaning
will, however, be indicated with sufficient accuracy if we
consider him to assert that, how far soever we carry our inquiry
into the ideas of property received among the Romans, however
closely we approach in tracing them to the infancy of law, we can
get no farther than a conception of ownership involving the three
elements in the canon  -- Possession, Adverseness of Possession,
that is a holding not permissive or subordinate, but exclusive
against the world, and Prescription, or a period of time during
which the Adverse Possession has uninterruptedly continued. It is
exceedingly probable that this maxim might be enunciated with
more generality than was allowed to it by its author, and that no
sound or safe conclusion can be looked for from investigations
into any system of laws which are pushed farther back than the
point at which these combined ideas constitute the notion of
proprietary right. Meantime, so far from bearing out the popular
theory of the origin of property, Savigny's canon is particularly
valuable as directing our attention to its weakest point. In the
view of Blackstone and those whom he follows, it was the mode of
assuming the exclusive enjoyment which mysteriously affected the
minds of the fathers of our race. But the mystery does not reside
here. It is not wonderful that property began in adverse
possession. It is not surprising that the first proprietor should
have been the strong man armed who kept his goods in peace. But
why it was that lapse of time created a sentiment of respect for
his possession -- which is the exact source of the universal
reverence of mankind for that which has for a long period de
facto existed -- are questions really deserving the profoundest
examination, but lying far beyond the boundary of our present
inquiries. 
    Before pointing out the quarter in which we may hope to glean
some information, scanty and uncertain at best, concerning the
early history of proprietary right, I venture to state my opinion
that the popular impression in reference to the part played by
Occupancy in the first stages of civilisation directly reverses
the truth. Occupancy is the advised assumption of physical
possession; and the notion that an act of this description
confers a title to "res nullius," so far from being
characteristic of very early societies, is in all probability the
growth of a refined jurisprudence and of a settled condition of
the laws. It is only when the rights of property have gained a
sanction from long practical inviolability and when the vast
majority of the objects of enjoyment have been subjected to
private ownership, that mere possession is allowed to invest the
first possessor with dominion over commodities in which no prior
proprietorship has been asserted. The sentiment in which this
doctrine originated is absolutely irreconcilable with that
infrequency and uncertainty of proprietary rights which
distinguish the beginnings of civilisation. Its true basis seems
to be, not an instinctive bias towards the institution of
Property, but a presumption arising out of the long continuance
of that institution, that everything ought to have an owner. When
possession is taken of a "res nullius," that is, of an object
which is not, or has never been, reduced to dominion, the
possessor is permitted to become proprietor from a feeling that
all valuable things are naturally the subjects of an exclusive
enjoyment, and that in the given case there is no one to invest
with the right of property except the Occupant. The Occupant in
short, becomes the owner, because all things are presumed to be
somebody's property and because no one can be pointed out as
having a better right than he to the proprietorship of this
particular thing. 
    Even were there no other objection to the descriptions of
mankind in their natural state which we have been discussing,
there is one particular in which they are fatally at variance
with the authentic evidence possessed by us. It will be observed
that the acts and motives which these theories suppose are the
acts and motives of Individuals. It is each Individual who for
himself subscribes the Social Compact. It is some shifting
sandbank in which the grains are Individual men, that according
to the theory of Hobbes is hardened into the social rock by the
wholesome discipline of force. It is an Individual who, in the
picture drawn by Blackstone, "is in the occupation of a
determined spot of ground for rest, for shade, or the like." The
vice is one which necessarily afflicts all the theories descended
from the Natural Law of the Romans, which differed principally
from their Civil Law in the account which it took of Individuals,
and which has rendered precisely its greatest service to
civilisation in enfranchising the individual from the authority
of archaic society. But Ancient Law, it must again be repeated,
knows next to nothing of Individuals. It is concerned not with
Individuals, but with Families, not with single human beings, but
groups. Even when the law of the State has succeeded in
permeating the small circles of kindred into which it had
originally no means of penetrating, the view it takes of
Individuals is curiously different from that taken by
jurisprudence in its maturest stage. The life of each citizen is
not regarded as limited by birth and death; it is but a
continuation of the existence of his forefathers, and it will be
prolonged in the existence of his descendants. 
    The Roman distinction between the Law of Persons and the Law
of Things, which though extremely convenient is entirely
artificial, has evidently done much to divert inquiry on the
subject before us from the true direction. The lessons learned in
discussing the Jus Personarum have been forgotten where the Jus
Rerum is reached, and Property, Contract, and Delict, have been
considered as if no hints concerning their original nature were
to be gained from the facts ascertained respecting the original
condition of Persons. The futility of this method would be
manifest if a system of pure archaic law could be brought before
us, and if the experiment could be tried of applying to it the
Roman classifications. It would soon be seen that the separation
of the Law of Persons from that of Things has no meaning in the
infancy of law, that the rules belonging to the two departments
are inextricably mingled together, and that the distinctions of
the later jurists are appropriate only to the later
jurisprudence. From what has been said in the earlier portions of
this treatise, it will be gathered that there is a strong a
priori improbability of our obtaining any clue to the early
history of property, if we confine our notice to the proprietary
rights of individuals. It is more than likely that
joint-ownership, and not separate ownership, is the really
archaic institution, and that the forms of property which will
afford us instruction will be those which are associated with the
rights of families and of groups of kindred. The Roman
jurisprudence will not here assist in enlightening us, for it is
exactly the Roman jurisprudence which, transformed by the theory
of Natural Law, has bequeathed to the moderns the impression that
individual ownership is the normal state of proprietary right,
and that ownership in common by groups of men is only the
exception to a general rule. There is, however, one community
which will always be carefully examined by the inquirer who is in
quest of any lost institution of primeval society. How far soever
any such institution may have undergone change among the branch
of the Indo-European family which has been settled for ages in
India, it will seldom be found to have entirely cast aside the
shell in which it was originally reared. It happens that, among
the Hindoos, we do find a form of ownership which ought at once
to rivet our attention from its exactly fitting in with the ideas
which our studies in the Law of Persons would lead us to
entertain respecting the original condition of property. The
Village Community of India is at once an organised patriarchal
society and an assemblage of co-proprietors. The personal
relations to each other of the men who compose it are
indistinguishably confounded with their proprietary rights, and
to the attempts of English functionaries to separate the two may
be assigned some of the most formidable miscarriages of
Anglo-Indian administration. The Village Community is known to be
of immense antiquity. In whatever direction research has been
pushed into Indian history, general or local, it has always found
the Community in existence at the farthest point of its progress.
A great number of intelligent and observant writers, most of whom
had no theory of any sort to support concerning its nature and
origin, agree in considering it the least destructible
institution of a society which never willingly surrenders any one
of its usages to innovation. Conquests and revolutions seem to
have swept over it without disturbing or displacing it, and the
most beneficent systems of government in India have always been
those which have recognised it as the basis of administration. 
    The mature Roman law, and modern jurisprudence following in
its wake, look upon co-ownership as an exceptional and momentary
condition of the rights of property. This view is clearly
indicated in the maxim which obtains universally in Western
Europe, Nemo in communione potest invitus detineri ("No one can
be kept in co-proprietorship against his will"). But in India
this order of ideas is reversed, and it may be said that separate
proprietorship is always on its way to become proprietorship in
common. The process has been adverted to already. As soon as a
son is born, he acquires a vested interest in his father's
substance, and on attaining years of discretion he is even, in
certain contingencies, permitted by the letter of the law to call
for a partition of the family estate. As a fact, however, a
division rarely takes place even at the death of the father, and
the property constantly remains undivided for several
generations, though every member of every generation has a legal
right to an undivided share in it. The domain thus held in common
is sometimes administered by an elected manager, but more
generally, and in some provinces always, it is managed by the
eldest agnate, by the eldest representative of the eldest line of
the stock. Such an assemblage of joint proprietors, a body of
kindred holding a domain in common, is the simplest form of an
Indian Village Community, but the Community is more than a
brotherhood of relatives and more than an association of
partners. It is an organized society, and besides providing for
the management of the common fund, it seldom fails to provide, by
a complete staff of functionaries, for internal government, for
police, for the administration of justice, and for the
apportionment of taxes and public duties. 
    The process which I have described as that under which a
Village Community is formed, may be regarded as typical. Yet it
is not to be supposed that every Village Community in India drew
together in so simple a manner. Although, in the North of India,
the archives, as I am informed, almost invariably show that the
Community was founded by a single assemblage of blood-relations,
they also supply information that men of alien extraction have
always, from time to time, been engrafted on it, and a mere
purchaser of a share may generally, under certain conditions, be
admitted to the brotherhood. In the South of the Peninsula there
are often Communities which appear to have sprung not from one
but from two or more families; and there are some whose
composition is known to be entirely artificial; indeed, the
occasional aggregation of men of different castes in the same
society is fatal to the hypothesis of a common descent. Yet in
all these brotherhoods either the tradition is preserved, or the
assumption made, of an original common parentage. Mountstuart
Elphinstone, who writes more particularly of the Southern Village
Communities, observes of them (History of India, i. 126): "The
popular notion is that the Village landholders are all descended
from one or more individuals who settled the village; and that
the only exceptions are formed by persons who have derived their
rights by purchase or otherwise from members of the original
stock. The supposition is confirmed by the fact that, to this
day, there are only single families of landholders in small
villages and not many in large ones; but each has branched out
into so many members that it is not uncommon for the whole
agricultural labour to be done by the landholders, without the
aid either of tenants or of labourers. The rights of the
landholders are their collectively and, though they almost always
have a more or less perfect partition of them, they never have an
entire separation. A landholder, for instance, can sell or
mortgage his rights; but he must first have the consent of the
Village, and the purchaser steps exactly into his place and takes
up all his obligations. If a family becomes extinct, its share
returns to the common stock."
    Some considerations which have been offered in the fifth
chapter of this volume will assist the reader, I trust, in
appreciating the significance of Elphinstone's language. No
institution of the primitive world is likely to have been
preserved to our day, unless it has acquired an elasticity
foreign to its original nature through some vivifying legal
fiction. The Village Community then is not necessarily an
assemblage of blood-relations, but it is either such an
assemblage or a body of co-proprietor formed on the model of an
association of kinsmen. The type with which it should be compared
is evidently not the Roman Family, but the Roman Gens or House.
The Gens was also a group on the model of the family. it was the
family extended by a variety of fictions of which the exact
nature was lost in antiquity. In historical times, its leading
characteristics were the very two which Elphinstone remarks in
the Village Community. There was always the assumption of a
common origin, an assumption sometimes notoriously at variance
with fact; and, to repeat the historian's words, "if a family
became extinct, its share returned to the common stock." In old
Roman law, unclaimed inheritances escheated to the Gentiles. It
is further suspected by all who have examined their history that
the Communities, like the Gentes, have been very generally
adulterated by the admission of strangers, but the exact mode of
absorption cannot now be ascertained. At present, they are
recruited, as Elphinstone tells us, by the admission of
purchasers, with the consent of the brotherhood. The acquisition
of the adopted member is, however, of the nature of a universal
succession; together with the share he has bought, he succeeds to
the liabilities which the vendor had incurred towards the
aggregate group. He is an Emptor Familiae, and inherits the legal
clothing of the person whose place he begins to fill. The consent
of the whole brotherhood required for his admission may remind us
of the consent which the Comitia Curiata, the Parliament of that
larger brotherhood of self-styled kinsmen, the ancient Roman
commonwealth, so strenuously insisted on as essential to the
legalisation of an Adoption or the confirmation of a Will. 
    The tokens of an extreme antiquity are discoverable in almost
every single feature of the Indian Village Communities. We have
so many independent reasons for suspecting that the infancy of
law is distinguished by the prevalence of co-ownership by the
intermixture of personal with proprietary rights, and by the
confusion of public with private duties, that we should be
justified in deducing many important conclusions from our
observation of these proprietary brotherhoods, even if no
similarly compounded societies could be detected in any other
part of the world. It happens, however, that much earnest
curiosity has been very recently attracted to a similar set of
phenomena in those parts of Europe which have been most slightly
affected by the feudal transformation of property, and which in
many important particulars have as close an affinity with the
Eastern as with the Western world. The researches of M. de
Haxthausen, M. Tengoborski, and others, have shown us that the
Russian villages are not fortuitous assemblages of men, nor are
they unions founded on contract; they are naturally organised
communities like those of India. It is true that these villages
are always in theory the patrimony of some noble proprietor, and
the peasants have within historical times been converted into the
predial, and to a great extent into the personal, serfs of the
seignior. But the pressure of this superior ownership has never
crushed the ancient organisation of the village, and it is
probable that the enactment of the Czar of Russia, who is
supposed to have introduced serfdom, was really intended to
prevent the peasants from abandoning that co-operation without
which the old social order could not long be maintained. In the
assumption of an agnatic connection between the villagers, in the
blending of personal rights with privileges of ownership, and in
a variety of spontaneous provisions for internal administration,
the Russian Village appears to be a nearly exact repetition of
the Indian Community; but there is one important difference which
we note with the greatest interest. The co-owners of an Indian
village, though their property is blended, have their rights
distinct, and this separation of rights is complete and continues
indefinitely. The severance of rights is also theoretically
complete in a Russian village, but there it is only temporary.
After the expiration of a given, built not in all cases of the
same, period separate ownerships are extinguished, the land of
the village is thrown into a mass, and then it is re-distributed
among the families composing the community, according to their
number. This repartition having been effected, the rights of
families and of individuals are again allowed to branch out into
various lines, which they continue to follow till another period
of division comes round. An even more curious variation from this
type of ownership occurs in some of those countries which long
formed a debateable land between the Turkish empire and the
possessions of the House of Austria, In Servia, in Croatia, and
the Austrian Sclavonia, the villages are also brotherhoods of
persons who are at once co-owners and kinsmen; but there the
internal arrangements of the community differ from those adverted
to in the last two examples. The substance of the common property
is in this case neither divided in practice nor considered in
theory as divisible, but the entire land is cultivated by the
combineD labour of all the villagers, and the produce is annually
distributed among the households, sometimes according to their
supposed wants, sometimes according to rules which give to
particular persons a fixed share of the usufruct. All these
practices are traced by the jurists of the East of Europe to a
principle which is asserted to be found in the earliest
Sclavonian laws, the principle that the property of families
cannot be divided for a perpetuity. 
    The great interest of these phenomena in an inquiry like the
present arises from the light they throw on the development of
distinct proprietary rights inside the groups by which property
seems to have been originally held. We have the strongest reason
for thinking that property once belonged not to individuals nor
even to isolated families, but to larger societies composed on
the patriarchal model; but the mode of transition from ancient to
modern ownerships, obscure at best, would have been infinitely
obscurer if several distinguishable forms of Village Communities
had not been discovered and examined. It is worth while to attend
to the varieties of internal arrangement within the patriarchal
groups which are, or were till recently, observable among races
of Indo-European blood. The chiefs of the ruder Highland clans
used, it is said, to dole out food to the heads of the households
under their jurisdiction at the very shortest intervals, and
sometimes day by day. A periodical distribution is also made to
the Sclavonian villagers of the Austrian and Turkish provinces by
the elders of their body, but then it is a distribution once for
all of the total produce of the year. In the Russian villages,
however, the substance of the property ceases to be looked upon
as indivisible, and separate proprietary claims are allowed
freely to grow up, but then the progress of separation is
peremptorily arrested after it has continued a certain time. In
India, not only is there no indivisibility of the common fund,
but separate proprietorship in parts of it may be indefinitely
prolonged and may branch out into any number of derivative
ownerships, the de facto partition of the stock being, however,
checked by inveterate usage, and by the rule against the
admission of strangers without the consent of the brotherhood. It
is not of course intended to insist that these different forms of
the Village Community represent distinct stages in a process of
transmutation which has been everywhere accomplished in the same
manner. But, though the evidence does not warrant our going so
far as this, it renders less presumptuous the conjecture that
private property, in the shape in which we know it, was chiefly
formed by the gradual disentanglement of the separate rights of
individuals from the blended rights of a community. Our studies
in the Law of Persons seemed to show us the Family expanding into
the Agnatic group of kinsmen, then the Agnatic group dissolving
into separate households; lastly the household supplanted by the
individual; and it is now suggested that each step in the change
corresponds to an analogous alteration in the nature of
Ownership. If there be any truth in the suggestion, it is to be
observed that it materially affects the problem which theorists
on the origin of Property have generally proposed to themselves.
The question -- perhaps an insoluble one which they have mostly
agitated is, what were the motives which first induced men to
respect each other's possessions? It may still be put, without
much hope of finding an answer to it, in the form of any inquiry
into the reasons which led one composite group to keep aloof from
the domain of another. But, if it be true that far the most
important passage in the history of Private Property is its
gradual elimination from the co-ownership of kinsmen, then the
great point of inquiry is identical with that which lies on the
threshold of all historical law -- what were the motives which
originally prompted men to hold together in the family union? To
such a question, Jurisprudence, unassisted by other sciences, is
not competent to give a reply. The fact can only be noted. 
    The undivided state of property in ancient societies is
consistent with a peculiar sharpness of division, which shows
itself as soon as any single share is completely separated from
the patrimony of the group. This phenomenon springs, doubtless,
from the circumstance that the property is supposed to become the
domain of a new group, so that any dealing with it, in its
divided state, is a transaction between two highly complex
bodies. I have already compared Ancient Law to Modern
International Law, in respect of the size and complexity of the
corporate associations, whose rights and duties it settles. As
the contracts and conveyances known to ancient law are contracts
and conveyances to which not single individuals, but organised
companies of men, are parties, they are in the highest degree
ceremonious; they require a variety of symbolical acts and words
intended to impress the business on the memory of all who take
part in it; and they demand the presence of an inordinate number
of witnesses. From these peculiarities, and others allied to
them, springs the universally unmalleable character of the
ancient forms of property. Sometimes the patrimony of the family
is absolutely inalienable, as was the case with the Sclavonians,
and still oftener, though alienations may not be entirely
illegitimate, they are virtually impracticable, as among most of
the Germanic tribes, from the necessity of having the consent of
a large number of persons to the transfer. Where these
impediments do not exist, or can be surmounted, the act of
conveyance itself is generally burdened with a perfect load of
ceremony, in which not one iota can be safely neglected. Ancient
law uniformly refuses to dispense with a single gesture, however
grotesque; with a single syllable, however its meaning may have
been forgotten; with a single witness, however superfluous may be
his testimony. The entire solemnities must be scrupulously
completed by persons legally entitled to take part in them, or
else the conveyance is null, and the seller is re-established in
the rights of which he had vainly attempted to divest himself. 
    These various obstacles to the free circulation of the
objects of use and enjoyment, begin of course to make themselves
felt as soon as society has acquired even a slight degree of
activity, and the expedients by which advancing communities
endeavour to overcome them form the staple of the history of
Property. Of such expedients there is one which takes precedence
of the rest from its antiquity and universality. The idea seems
to have spontaneously suggested itself to a great number of early
societies, to classify property into kinds. One kind or sort of
property is placed on a lower footing of dignity than the others,
but at the same time is relieved from the fetters which antiquity
has imposed on them. Subsequently, the superior convenience of
the rules governing the transfer and descent of the lower order
of property becomes generally recognised, and by a gradual course
of innovation the plasticity of the less dignified class of
valuable objects is communicated to the classes which stand
conventionally higher. The history of Roman Property Law is the
history of the assimilation of Res Mancipi to Res Nec Mancipi.
The history of Property on the European Continent is the history
of the subversion of the feudalised law of land by the Romanised
law of moveables; and, though the history of ownership in England
is not nearly completed, it is visibly the law of personalty
which threatens to absorb and annihilate the law of realty. 
    The only natural classification of the objects of enjoyment,
the only classification which corresponds with an essential
difference in the subject-matter, is that which divides them into
Moveables and Immoveables. Familiar as is this classification to
jurisprudence, it was very slowly developed by Roman law; from
which we inherit it, and was only finally adopted by it in its
latest stage. The classifications of Ancient Law have sometimes a
superficial resemblance to this. They occasionally divide
property into categories, and place immoveables in one of them;
but then it is found that they either class along with
immoveables a number of objects which have no sort of relation
with them, or else divorce them from various rights to which they
have a close affinity. Thus, the Res Mancipi of Roman Law
included not only land, but slaves, horses, and oxen. Scottish
law ranks with land a certain class of securities, and Hindoo law
associates it with slaves. English law, on the other hand, parts
leases of land for years from other interests in the soil, and
joins them to personalty under the name of chattels real.
Moreover the classifications of Ancient Law are classifications
implying superiority and inferiority; while the distinction
between moveables and immoveables, so long at least as it was
confined to Roman jurisprudence, carried with it no suggestion
whatever of a difference in dignity. The Res Mancipi, however,
did certainly at first enjoy a precedence over the Res Nec
Mancipi, as did heritable property in Scotland and realty in
England, over the personalty to which they were opposed. The
lawyers of all systems have spared no pains in striving to refer
these classifications to some intelligible principle; but the
reasons of the severance must ever be vainly sought for in the
philosophy of law: they belong not to its philosophy, but to its
history. The explanation which appears to cover the greatest
number of instances is, that the objects of enjoyment honoured
above the rest were the forms of property known first and
earliest to each particular community, and dignified therefore
emphatically with the designation of Property. On the other hand,
the articles not enumerated among the favoured objects seem to
have been placed on a lower standing, because the knowledge of
their value was posterior to the epoch at which the catalogue of
superior property was settled. They were at first unknown, rare,
limited in their uses, or else regarded as mere appendages to the
privileged objects. Thus, though the Roman Res Mancipi included a
number of moveable articles of great value, still the most costly
jewels were never allowed to take rank as Res Mancipi, because
they were unknown to the early Romans. In the same way chattels
real in England are said to have been degraded to the footing of
personalty, from the infrequency and valuelessness of such
estates under the feudal land-law. But the grand point of
interest is, the continued degradation of these commodities when
their importance had increased and their number had multiplied.
Why were they not successively intruded among the favoured
objects of enjoyment? One reason is found in the stubbornness
with which Ancient Law adheres to its classifications. It is a
characteristic both of uneducated minds and of early societies,
that they are little able to conceive a general rule apart from
the particular applications of it with which they are practically
familiar. They cannot dissociate a general term or maxim from the
special examples which meet them in daily experience; and in this
way the designation covering the best-known forms of property is
denied to articles which exactly resemble them in being objects
of enjoyment and subjects of right. But to these influences,
which exert peculiar force in a subject-matter so stable as that
of law, are afterwards added others more consistent with progress
in enlightenment and in the conceptions of general expediency.
Courts and lawyers become at last alive to the inconvenience of
the embarrassing formalities required for the transfer, recovery,
or devolution of the favoured commodities, and grow unwilling to
fetter the newer descriptions of property with the technical
trammels which characterised the infancy of law. Hence arises a
disposition to keep these last on a lower grade in the
arrangements of Jurisprudence, and to permit their transfer by
simpler processes than those which, in archaic conveyances, serve
as stumbling-blocks to good faith and stepping-stones to fraud.
We are perhaps in some danger of underrating the inconveniences
of the ancient modes of transfer. Our instruments of conveyance
are written, so that their language, well pondered by the
professional draftsman, is rarely defective in accuracy. But an
ancient conveyance was not written, but acted. Gestures and words
took the place of written technical phraseology, and any formula
mispronounced, or symbolical act omitted, would have vitiated the
proceeding as fatally as a material mistake in stating the uses
or setting out the remainders would, two hundred years ago, have
vitiated an English deed. Indeed, the mischiefs of the archaic
ceremonial are even thus only half stated. So long as elaborate
conveyances, written or acted, are required for the alienation of
land alone, the chances of mistake are not considerable in the
transfer of a description of property which is seldom got rid of
with much precipitation. But the higher class of property in the
ancient world comprised not only land but several of the
commonest and several of the most valuable moveables. When once
the wheels of society had begun to move quickly, there must have
been immense inconvenience in demanding a highly intricate form
of transfer for a horse or an ox, or for the most costly chattel
of the old world -- the Slave. Such commodities must have been
constantly and even ordinarily conveyed with incomplete forms,
and held, therefore, under imperfect titles. 
    The Res Mancipi of old Roman law were land -- in historical
times, land on Italian soil, -- slaves and beasts of burden, such
as horses and oxen. It is impossible to doubt that the objects
which make up the class are the instruments of agricultural
labour, the commodities of first consequence to a primitive
people. Such commodities were at first, I imagine, called
emphatically Things or Property, and the mode of conveyance by
which they were transferred was called a Mancipium or
Mancipation; but it was not probably till much later that they
received the distinctive appellation of Res Mancipi, "Things
which require a Mancipation." By their side there may have
existed or grown up a class of objects, for which it was not
worth while to insist upon the full ceremony of Mancipation. It
would be enough if, in transferring these last from owner to
owner, a part only of the ordinary formalities were proceeded
with, namely, that actual delivery, physical transfer, or
tradition, which is the most obvious index of a change of
proprietorship. Such commodities were the Res Nec Mancipi of the
ancient jurisprudence, "things which did not require a
Mancipation," little prized probably at first, and not often
passed from one group of proprietors to another. While, however,
the list of the Res Mancipi was irrevocably closed, that of the
Res Nec Mancipi admitted of indefinite expansion; and hence every
fresh conquest of man over material nature added an item to the
Res Nec Mancipi, or effected an improvement in those already
recognised. Insensibly, therefore, they mounted to an equality
with the Res Mancipi, and the impression of an intrinsic
inferiority being thus dissipated, men began to observe the
manifold advantages of the simple formality which accompanied
their transfer over the more intricate and more venerable
ceremonial. Two of the agents of legal amelioration, Fictions and
Equity, were assiduously employed by the Roman lawyers to give
the practical effects of a Mancipation to a Tradition: and,
though Roman legislators long shrank from enacting that the right
of property in a Res Mancipi should be immediately transferred by
bare delivery of the article, yet even this step was at last
ventured upon by Justinian, in whose jurisprudence the difference
between Res Mancipi and Res Nec Mancipi disappears, and Tradition
or Delivery becomes the one great conveyance known to the law.
The marked preference which the Roman lawyers very early gave to
Tradition caused them to assign it a place in their theory which
has helped to blind their modern disciples to its true history.
It was classed among the "natural" modes of acquisition, both
because it was generally practised among the Italian tribes, and
because it was a process which attained its object by the
simplest mechanism. If the expressions of the jurisconsults be
pressed, they undoubtedly imply that Tradition, which belongs to
the Law Natural, is more ancient than Mancipation, which is an
institution of Civil Society; and this, I need not say, is the
exact reverse of the truth. 
    The distinction between Res Mancipi and Res Nec Mancipi is
the type of a class of distinctions to which civilisation is much
indebted, distinctions which run through the whole mass of
commodities, placing a few of them in a class by themselves, and
relegating the others to a lower category. The inferior kinds of
property are first, from disdain and disregard, released from the
perplexed ceremonies in which primitive law delights, and thus
afterwards, in another state of intellectual progress, the simple
methods of transfer and recovery which have been allowed to come
into use serve as a model which condemns by its convenience and
simplicity the cumbrous solemnities inherited from ancient days.
But, in some societies, the trammels in which Property is tied up
are much too complicated and stringent to be relaxed in so easy a
manner. Whenever male children have been born to a Hindoo, the
law of India, as I have stated, gives them all an interest in his
property, and makes their consent a necessary condition of its
alienation. In the same spirit, the general usage of the old
Germanic peoples -- it is remarkable that the Anglo-Saxon customs
seem to have been an exception forbade alienations without the
consent of the male children; and the primitive law of the
Sclavonians even prohibited them altogether. It is evident that
such impediments as these cannot be overcome by a distinction
between kinds of property, inasmuch as the difficulty extends to
commodities of all sorts; and accordingly, Ancient Law, when once
launched on a course of improvement, encounters them with a
distinction of another character, a distinction classifying
property, not according to its nature but according to its
origin. In India, where there are traces of both systems of
classification, the one which we are considering is exemplified
in the difference which Hindoo law establishes between
Inheritances and Acquisitions. The inherited property of the
father is shared by the children as soon as they are born; but
according to the custom of most provinces, the acquisitions made
by him during his lifetime are wholly his own, and can be
transferred by him at pleasure. A similar distinction was not
unknown to Roman law, in which the earliest innovation on the
Parental Powers took the form of a permission given to the son to
keep for himself whatever he might have acquired in military
service. But the most extensive use ever made of this mode of
classification appears to have been among the Germans, I have
repeatedly stated that the allod, though not inalienable, was
commonly transferable with the greatest difficulty. and moreover,
it descended exclusively to the agnatic kindred. Hence an
extraordinary variety of distinctions came to be recognised, all
intended to diminish the inconveniences inseparable from allodial
property. The wehrgeld, for example, or composition for the
homicide of a relative, which occupies so large a space in German
jurisprudence, formed no part of the family domain, and descended
according to rules of succession altogether different. Similarly,
the reipus, or fine leviable on the re-marriage of a widow, did
not enter into the allod of the person to whom it was paid, and
followed a line of devolution in which the privileges of the
agnates were neglected. The law, too, as among the Hindoos,
distinguished the Acquisitions of the chief of the household from
his Inherited property, and permitted him to deal with them under
much more liberal conditions. Classifications of the other sort
were also admitted, and the familiar distinction drawn between
land and moveables; but moveable property was divided into
several subordinate categories, to each of which different rules
applied. This exuberance of classification, which may strike us
as strange in so rude a people as the German conquerors of the
Empire, is doubtless to be explained by the presence in their
systems of a considerable element of Roman law, absorbed by them
during their long sojourn on the confines of the Roman dominion.
It is not difficult to trace a great number of the rules
governing the transfer and devolution of the commodities which
lay outside the allod, to their source in Roman jurisprudence,
from which they were probably borrowed at widely distant epochs,
and in fragmentary importations. How far the obstacles to the
free circulation of property were surmounted by such
contrivances, we have not the means even of conjecturing, for the
distinctions adverted to have no modern history. As I before
explained, the allodial form of property was entirely lost in the
feudal, and when the consolidation of feudalism was once
completed, there was practically but one distinction left
standing of all those which had been known to the western world
-- the distinction between land and goods, immoveables and
moveables. Externally this distinction was the same with that
which Roman law had finally accepted, but the law of the middle
ages differed from that of Rome in distinctly considering
immoveable property to be more dignified than moveable. Yet this
one sample is enough to show the importance of the class of
expedients to which it belongs. In all the countries governed by
systems based on the French codes, that is, through much the
greatest part of the Continent of Europe, the law of moveables,
which was always Roman law, has superseded and annulled the
feudal law of land. England is the only country of importance in
which this transmutation, though it has gone some way, is not
nearly accomplished. Our own, too, it may be added, is the only
considerable European country in which the separation of
moveables from immoveables has been somewhat disturbed by the
same influences which caused the ancient classifications to
depart from the only one which is countenanced by nature. In the
main, the English distinction has been between land and goods;
but a certain class of goods have gone as heir-looms with the
land, and a certain description of interests in land have from
historical causes been ranked with personalty This is not the
only instance in which English jurisprudence, standing apart from
the main current of legal modification, has reproduced phenomena
of archaic law. 
    I proceed to notice one or two more contrivances by which the
ancient trammels of proprietary right were more or less
successfully relaxed, premising that the scheme of this treatise
only permits me to mention those which are of great antiquity. On
one of them in particular it is necessary to dwell for a moment
or two, because persons unacquainted with the early history of
law will not be easily persuaded that a principle, of which
modern jurisprudence has very slowly and with the greatest
difficulty obtained the recognition, was really familiar to the
very infancy of legal science. There is no principle in all law
which the moderns, in spite of its beneficial character, have
been so loath to adopt and to carry to its legitimate
consequences as that which was known to the Romans as Usucapion,
and which has descended to modern jurisprudence under the name of
Prescription. It was a positive rule of the oldest Roman law, a
rule older than the Twelve Tables, that commodities which had
been uninterruptedly possessed for a certain period became the
property of the possessor. The period of possession was
exceedingly short one or two years according to the nature of the
commodities and in historical times Usucapion was only allowed to
operate when possession had commenced in a particular way; but I
think it likely that at a less advanced epoch possession was
converted into ownership under conditions even less severe than
we read of in our authorities. As I have said before, I am far
from asserting that the respect of men for de facto possession is
a phenomenon which jurisprudence can account for by itself, but
it is very necessary to remark that primitive societies, in
adopting the principle of Usucapion, were not beset with any of
the speculative doubts and hesitations which have impeded its
reception among the moderns. Prescriptions were viewed by the
modern lawyers, first with repugnance, afterwards with reluctant
approval. In several countries, including our own, legislation
long declined to advance beyond the rude device of barring all
actions based on a wrong which had been suffered earlier than a
fixed point of time in the past, generally the first year of some
preceding reign; nor was it till the middle ages had finally
closed, and James the First had ascended the throne of England,
that we obtained a true statute of limitation of a very imperfect
kind. This tardiness in copying one of the most famous chapters
of Roman law, which was no doubt constantly read by the majority
of European lawyers, the modern world owes to the influence of
the Canon Law. The ecclesiastical customs out of which the Canon
Law grew, concerned as they were with sacred or quasi-sacred
interests, very naturally regarded the privileges which they
conferred as incapable of being lost through disuse however
prolonged; and in accordance with this view, the spiritual
jurisprudence, when afterwards consolidated, was distinguished by
a marked leaning against Prescriptions. It was the fate of the
Canon Law when held up by the clerical lawyers as a pattern to
secular legislation, to have a peculiar influence on first
principles. It gave to the bodies of custom which were formed
throughout Europe far fewer express rules than did the Roman law,
but then it seems to have communicated a bias to professional
opinion on a surprising number of fundamental points, and the
tendencies thus produced progressively gained strength as each
system was developed. One of the dispositions it produced was a
disrelish for Prescriptions; but I do not know that this
prejudice would have operated as powerfully as it has done, if it
had not fallen in with the doctrine of the scholastic jurists of
the realist sect, who taught that, whatever turn actual
legislation might take, a right, how long soever neglected, was
in point of fact indestructible. The remains of this state of
feeling still exist. Wherever the philosophy of law is earnestly
discussed, questions respecting the speculative basis of
Prescription are always hotly disputed; and it is still a point
of the greatest interest in France and Germany, whether a person
who has been out of possession for a series of years is deprived
of his ownership as a penalty for his neglect, or loses it
through the summary interposition of the law in its desire to
have afinis litium. But no such scruples troubled the mind of
early Roman society. Their ancient usages directly took away the
ownership of everybody who had been out of possession, under
certain circumstances, during one or two year. What was the exact
tenor of the rule of Usucapion in its earliest shape, it is not
easy to say; but, taken with the limitations which we find
attending it in the books, it was a most useful security against
the mischiefs of a too cumbrous system of conveyance. In order to
have the benefit of Usucapion, it was necessary that the adverse
possession should have begun in good faith, that is, with belief
on the part of the possessor that he was lawfully acquiring the
property, and it was farther required that the commodity should
have been transferred to him by some mode of alienation which,
however unequal to conferring a complete title in the particular
case, was at least recognised by the law. In the case therefore
of a Mancipation, however slovenly the performance might have
been, yet if it had been carried so far as to involve a Tradition
or Delivery, the vice of the title would be cured by Usucapion in
two years at most. I know nothing in the practice of the Romans
which testifies so strongly to their legal genius as the use
which they made of Usucapion. The difficulties which beset them
were nearly the same with those which embarrassed and still
embarrass the lawyers of England. Owing to the complexity of
their system, which as yet they had neither the courage nor the
power to reconstruct, actual right was constantly getting
divorced from technical right, the equitable ownership from the
legal. But Usucapion, as manipulated by the jurisconsults,
supplied a self-acting machinery, by which the defects of titles
to property were always in course of being cured, and by which
the ownerships that were temporarily separated were again rapidly
cemented together with the briefest possible delay. Usucapion did
not lose its advantages till the reforms of Justinian. But as
soon as law and equity had been completely fused, and when
Mancipation ceased to be the Roman conveyance, there was no
further necessity for the ancient contrivance, and Usucapion,
with its periods of time considerably lengthened, became the
Prescription which has at length been adopted by nearly all
systems of modern law. 
    I pass by with brief mention another expedient having the
same object with the last, which, though it did not immediately
make its appearance in English legal history, was of immemorial
antiquity in Roman law. such indeed is its apparent age that some
German civilians, not sufficiently aware of the light thrown on
the subject by the analogies of English law, have thought it even
older than the Mancipation. I speak of the Cessio in Jure, a
collusive recovery, in a Court of law of property sought to be
conveyed. The plaintiff claimed the subject of this proceeding
with the ordinary forms of a litigation; the defendant made
default; and the commodity was of course adjudged to the
plaintiff. I need scarcely remind the English lawyer that this
expedient suggested itself to our forefathers, and produced those
famous Fines and Recoveries which did so much to undo the
harshest trammels of the feudal land-law. The Roman and English
contrivances have very much in common and illustrate each other
most instructively, but there is this difference between them,
that the object of the English lawyers was to remove
complications already introduced into the title, while the Roman
jurisconsults sought to prevent them by substituting a mode of
transfer necessarily unimpeachable for one which too often
miscarried. The device is, in fact, one which suggests itself as
soon as Courts of Law are in steady operation, but are
nevertheless still under the empire of primitive notions. In an
advanced state of legal opinion, tribunals regard collusive
litigation as an abuse of their procedure; but there has always
been a time when, if their forms were scrupulously complied with,
they never dreamed of looking further. 
    The influence of Courts of Law and of their procedure upon
Property has been most extensive, but the subject is too large
for the dimensions of this treatise, and would carry us further
down the course of legal history than is consistent with its
scheme. It is desirable, however, to mention, that to this
influence we must attribute the importance of the distinction
between Property and Possession -- not, indeed, the distinction
itself, which (in the language of an eminent English civilian) is
the same thing as the distinction between the legal right to act
upon a thing and the physical power to do so -- but the
extraordinary importance which the distinction has obtained in
the philosophy of law. Few educated persons are so little versed
in legal literature as not to have heard that the language of the
Roman jurisconsults on the subject of Possession long occasioned
the greatest possible perplexity, and that the genius of Savigny
is supposed to have chiefly proved itself by the solution which
he discovered for the enigma. Possession, in fact, when employed
by the Roman lawyers, appears to have contracted a shade of
meaning not easily accounted for. The word, as appears from its
etymology; must have originally denoted physical contact or
physical contact resumeable at pleasure; but, as actually used
without any qualifying epithet, it signifies not simply physical
detention, but physical detention coupled with the intention to
hold the thing detained as one's own. Savigny, following Niebuhr,
perceived that for this anomaly there could only be a historical
origin. He pointed out that the Patrician burghers of Rome, who
had become tenants of the greatest part of the public domain at
nominal rents, were, in the view of the old Roman law, mere
possessors, but then they were possessors intending to keep their
land against all comers. They, in truth, put forward a claim
almost identical with that which has recently been advanced in
England by the lessees of Church lands. Admitting that in theory
they were the tenants-at-will of the state, they contended that
time and undisturbed enjoyment had ripened their holding into a
species of ownership, and that it would be unjust to eject them
for the purpose of redistributing the domain. The association of
this claim with the Patrician tenancies, permanently influenced
the sense of "possession." Meanwhile the only legal remedies of
which the tenants could avail themselves, if ejected or
threatened with disturbance, were the Possessory Interdicts,
summary processes of Roman law which were either expressly
devised by the Praetor for their protection, or else, according
to another theory, had in older times been employed for the
provisional maintenance of possessions pending the settlement of
questions of legal right. It came, therefore, to be understood
that everybody who possessed property as his own had the power of
demanding the Interdicts, and, by a system of highly artificial
pleading, the Interdictal process was moulded into a shape fitted
for the trial of conflicting claims to a disputed possession.
Then commenced a movement which, as Mr John Austin pointed out,
exactly reproduced itself in English law. Proprietors, domini,
began to prefer the simpler forms or speedier course of the
Interdict to the lagging and intricate formalities of the Real
Action, and for the purpose of availing themselves of the
possessory remedy fell back upon the possession which was
supposed to be involved in their proprietorship. The liberty
conceded to persons who were not true Possessors, but Owners, to
vindicate their rights by possessory remedies, though it may have
been at first a boon, had ultimately the effect of seriously
deteriorating both English and Roman jurisprudence. The Roman law
owes to it those subtleties on the subject of Possession which
have done so much to discredit it, while English law, after the
actions which it appropriated to the recovery of real property
had fallen into the most hopeless confusion, got rid at last of
the whole tangled mass by a heroic remedy. No one can doubt that
the virtual abolition of the English real actions which took
place nearly thirty years since was a public benefit, but still
persons sensitive to the harmonies of jurisprudence will lament
that, instead of cleansing, improving, and simplifying the true
proprietary actions, we sacrificed them all to the possessory
action of ejectment, thus basing our whole system of land
recovery upon a legal fiction. 
    Legal tribunals have also powerfully assisted to shape and
modify conceptions of proprietary right by means of the
distinction between Law and Equity, which always makes its first
appearance as a distinction between jurisdictions. Equitable
property in England is simply property held under the
jurisdiction of the Court of Chancery. At Rome, the Praetor's
Edict introduced its novel principles in the guise of a promise
that under certain circumstances a particular action or a
particular plea would be granted; and, accordingly, the property
in bonis, or Equitable Property, of Roman law was property
exclusively protected by remedies which had their source in the
Edict. The mechanism by which equitable rights were saved from
being overridden by the claims of the legal owner was somewhat
different in the two systems. With us their independence is
secured by the Injunction of the Court of Chancery. Since however
Law and Equity, while not as yet consolidated, were administered
under the Roman system by the same Court, nothing like the
Injunction was required, and the Magistrate took the simpler
course of refusing to grant to the Civil Law Owner those actions
and pleas by which alone he could obtain the property that
belonged in equity to another. But the practical operation of
both systems was nearly the same. Both, by means of a distinction
in procedure, were able to preserve new forms of property in a
sort of provisional existence, until the time should come when
they were recognised by the whole law. In this way, the Roman
Praetor gave an immediate right of property to the person who had
acquired a Res Mancipi by mere delivery, without waiting for the
ripening of Usucapion. Similarly he in time recognised an
ownership in the Mortgagee who had at first been a mere "bailee"
or depositary, and in the Emphyteuta, or tenant of land which was
subject to a fixed perpetual rent. Following a parallel line of
progress, the English Court of Chancery created a special
proprietorship for the Mortgagor, for the Cestui que Trust, for
the Married Woman who had the advantage of a particular kind of
settlement, and for the Purchaser who had not yet acquired a
complete legal ownership. All these are examples in which forms
of proprietory right, distinctly new, were recognised and
preserved. But indirectly Property has been affected in a
thousand ways by equity both in England and at Rome. Into
whatever corner of jurisprudence its authors pushed the powerful
instrument in their command, they were sure to meet, and touch,
and more or less materially modify the law of property: When in
the preceding pages I have spoken of certain ancient legal
distinctions and expedients as having powerfully affected the
history of ownership, I must be understood to mean that the
greatest part of their influence has arisen from the hints and
suggestions of improvement infused by them into the mental
atmosphere which was breathed by the fabricators of equitable
systems. 
    But to describe the influence of Equity on Ownership would be
to write its history down to our own days. I have alluded to it
principally because several esteemed contemporary writers have
thought that in the Roman severance of Equitable from Legal
property we have the clue to that difference in the conception of
Ownership, which apparently distinguishes the law of the middle
ages from the law of the Roman Empire. The leading characteristic
of the feudal conception is its recognition of a double
proprietorship, the superior ownership of the lord of the fief
co-existing with the inferior property or estate of the tenant.
Now this duplication of proprietary rightlooks, it is urged,
extremely like a generalised form of the Roman distribution of
rights over property into Quiritarian or legal, and (to use a
word of late origin) Bonitarian or equitable. Gaius himself
observes upon the splitting of dominion into two parts as a
singularity of Roman law, and expressly contrasts it with the
entire or allodial ownership to which other nations were
accustomed. Justinian, it is true, re-consolidated dominion into
one, but then it was the partially reformed system of the Western
Empire, and not Justinian's jurisprudence, with which the
barbarians were in contact during so many centuries. While they
remained poised on the edge of the Empire, it may well be that
they learned this distinction, which afterwards bore remarkable
fruit. In favour of this theory, it must at all events be
admitted that the element of Roman law in the various bodies of
barbarian custom has been very imperfectly examined. The
erroneous or insufficient theories which have served to explain
Feudalism resemble each other in their tendency to draw off
attention from this particular ingredient in its texture. The
older investigators, who have been mostly followed in this
country, attached an exclusive importance to the circumstances of
the turbulent period during which the Feudal system grew to
maturity; and in later times a new source of error has been added
to those already existing, in that pride of nationality which has
led German writers to exaggerate the completeness of the social
fabric which their forefathers had built up before their
appearance in the Roman world. One or two English inquirers who
looked in the right quarter for the foundations of the feudal
system, failed nevertheless to conduct their investigations to
any satisfactory result, either from searching too exclusively
for analogies in the compilations of Justinian, or from confining
their attention to the compendia of Roman law which are found
appended to some of the extant barbarian codes. But, if Roman
jurisprudence had any influence on the barbarous societies, it
had probably produced the greatest part of its effects before the
legislation of Justinian, and before the preparation of these
compendia. It was not the reformed and purified jurisprudence of
Justinian, but the undigested system which prevailed in the
Western Empire, and which the Eastern Corpus Juris never
succeeded in displacing, that I conceive to have clothed with
flesh and muscle the scanty skeleton of barbarous usage. The
change must be supposed to have taken place before the Germanic
tribes had distinctly appropriated, as conqueror, any portion of
the Roman dominions, and therefore long before Germanic monarchs
had ordered breviaries of Roman law to be drawn up for the use of
their Roman subjects. The necessity for some such hypothesis will
be felt by everybody who can appreciate the difference between
archaic and developed law. Rude as are the Leges Barbarorum which
remain to us, they are not rude enough to satisfy the theory of
their purely barbarous origin; nor have we any reason for
believing that we have received, in written records, more than a
fraction of the fixed rules which were practised among themselves
by the members of the conquering tribes. If we can once persuade
ourselves that a considerable element of debased Roman law
already existed in the barbarian systems, we shall have done
something to remove a grave difficulty. The German law of the
conquerors and the Roman law of their subjects would not have
combined if they had not possessed more affinity for each other
than refined jurisprudence has usually for the customs of
savages. It is extremely likely that the codes of the barbarians,
archaic as they seem, are only a compound of true primitive usage
with half-understood Roman rules, and that it was the foreign
ingredient which enabled them to coalesce with a Roman
jurisprudence that had already receded somewhat from the
comparative finish which it had acquired under the Western
Emperors. 
    But, though all this must be allowed, there are several
considerations which render it unlikely that the feudal form of
ownership was directly suggested by the Roman duplication of
domainial rights. The distinction between legal and equitable
property strikes one as a subtlety little likely to be
appreciated by barbarians; and, moreover, it can scarcely be
understood unless Courts of Law are contemplated in regular
operation. But the strongest reason against this theory is the
existence in Roman Law of a form of property -- a creation of
Equity, it is true -- which supplies a much simpler explanation
of the transition from one set of ideas to the other. This is the
Emphyteusis, upon which the Fief of the middle ages has often
been fathered, though without much knowledge of the exact share
which it had in bringing feudal ownership into the world. The
truth is that the Emphyteusis, not probably as yet known by its
Greek designation, marks one stage in a current of ideas which
led ultimately to feudalism. The first mention in Roman history
of estates larger than could be farmed by a Paterfamilias, with
his household of sons and slaves, occurs when we come to the
holdings of the Roman patricians. These great proprietors appear
to have had no idea of any system of farming by free tenants. 
    Their latifundia seem to have been universally cultivated by
slave-gangs, under bailiffs who were themselves slaves or
freedmen; and the only organisation attempted appears to have
consisted in dividing the inferior slaves into small bodies, and
making them the peculium of the better and trustier sort, who
thus acquired a kind of interest in the efficiency of their
labour. This system was, however, especially disadvantageous to
one class of estated proprietors, the Municipalities.
Functionaries in Italy were changed with the rapidity which often
surprises us in the administration of Rome herself; so that the
superintendence of a large laded domain by an Italian corporation
must have been excessively imperfect. Accordingly, we are told
that with the municipalities began the practice of letting out
agri vectigules, that is, of leasing land for a perpetuity to a
free tenant, at a fixed rent, and under certain conditions. The
plan was afterwards extensively imitated by individual
proprietors, and the tenant, whose relation to the owner had
originally been determined by his contract, was subsequently
recognised by the Praetor as having himself a qualified
proprietorship, which in time became known as an Emphyteusis.
From this point the history of tenure parts into two branches. In
the course of that long period during which our records of the
Roman Empire are most incomplete, the slave-gangs of the great
Roman families became transformed into the coloni, whose origin
and situation constitute one of the obscurest questions in all
History. We may suspect that they were formed partly by the
elevation of the slaves, and partly by the degradation of the
free farmers; and that they prove the richer classes of the Roman
Empire to have become aware of the increased value which landed
property obtains when the cultivator had an interest in the
produce of the land. We know that their servitude was predial;
that it wanted many of the characteristics of absolute slavery,
and that they acquitted their service to the landlord in
rendering to him a fixed portion of the annual crop. We know
further that they survived all the mutations of society in the
ancient and modern worlds. Though included in the lower courses
of the feudal structure, they continued in many countries to
render to the landlord precisely the same dues which they had
paid to the Roman dominus, and from a particular class among
them, the coloni medietarii who reserved half the produce for the
owner, are descended the metayer tenantry, who still conduct the
cultivation of the soil in almost all the South of Europe. On the
other hand, the Emphyteusis, if we may so interpret the allusions
to it in the Corpus Juris, became a favourite and beneficial
modification of property; and it may be conjectured that wherever
free farmers existed, it was this tenure which regulated their
interest in the land. The Praetor, as has been said, treated the
Emphyteuta as a true proprietor. When ejected, he was allowed to
reinstate himself by a Real Action, the distinctive badge of
proprietory right, and he was protected from disturbance by the
author of his lease so long as the canon, or quit-rent, was
punctually paid. But at the same time it must not be supposed
that the ownership of the author of the lease was either extinct
or dormant. It was kept alive by a power of re-entry on
nonpayment of the rent, a right of pre-emption in case of sale,
and a certain control over the mode of cultivation. We have,
therefore, in the Emphyteusis a striking example of the double
ownership which characterised feudal property, and one, moreover,
which is much simpler and much more easily imitated than the
juxtaposition of legal and equitable rights. The History of the
Roman tenure does not end, However, at this point. We have clear
evidence that between the great fortresses which, disposed along
the line of the Rhine and Danube, long secured the frontier of
the Empire against its barbarian neighbours, there extended a
succession of strips of land, the agri limitrophi, which were
occupied by veteran soldiers of the Roman army on the terms of an
Emphyteusis. There was a double ownership. The Roman State was
landlord of the soil, but the soldiers cultivated it without
disturbance so long as they held themselves ready to be called
out for military service whenever the state of the border should
require it. In fact, a sort of garrison-duty, under a system
closely resembling that of the military colonies on the
Austro-Turkish border, had taken the place of the quit-rent which
was the service of the ordinary Emphyteuta. It seems impossible
to doubt that this was the precedent copied by the barbarian
monarchs who founded feudalism. It had been within their view for
some hundred years, and many of the veterans who guarded the
border were, it is to be remembered, themselves of barbarian
extraction, who probably spoke the Germanic tongues. Not only
does the proximity of so easily followed a model explain whence
the Frankish and Lombard Sovereigns got the idea of securing the
military service of their followers by granting away portions of
their public domain; but it perhaps explains the tendency which
immediately showed itself in the Benefices to become hereditary,
for an Emphyteusis, though capable of being moulded to the terms
of the original contract, nevertheless descended as a general
rule to the heirs of the grantee. It is true that the holder of a
benefice, and more recently the lord of one of those fiefs into
which the benefices were transformed, appears to have owed
certain services which were not likely to have been rendered by
the military colonist, and were certainly not rendered by the
Emphyteuta. The duty of respect and gratitude to the feudal
superior, the obligation to assist in endowing his daughter and
equipping his son, the liability to his guardianship in minority,
and many other similar incidents of tenure, must have been
literally borrowed from the relations of Patron and Freedman
under Roman law, that is, of quondam-master and quondam-slave.
But then it is known that the earliest beneficiaries were the
personal companions of the sovereign, and it is indisputable that
this position, brilliant as it seems, was at first attended by
some shade of servile debasement. The person who ministered to
the Sovereign in his Court had given up something of that
absolute personal freedom which was the proudest privilege of the
allodial proprietor. 

