





CHAPTER XXIV



EDISON'S METHOD IN INVENTING



WHILE the world's progress depends largely upon

their ingenuity, inventors are not usually persons

who have adopted invention as a distinct profession,

but, generally speaking, are otherwise engaged

in various walks of life. By reason of more or

less inherent native genius they either make improvements

along lines of present occupation, or else

evolve new methods and means of accomplishing

results in fields for which they may have personal

predilections.



Now and then, however, there arises a man so

greatly endowed with natural powers and originality

that the creative faculty within him is too strong to

endure the humdrum routine of affairs, and manifests

itself in a life devoted entirely to the evolution of

methods and devices calculated to further the world's

welfare. In other words, he becomes an inventor by

profession. Such a man is Edison. Notwithstanding

the fact that nearly forty years ago (not a great while

after he had emerged from the ranks of peripatetic

telegraph operators) he was the owner of a large and

profitable business as a manufacturer of the telegraphic

apparatus invented by him, the call of his

nature was too strong to allow of profits being laid

away in the bank to accumulate. As he himself has

said, he has "too sanguine a temperament to allow

money to stay in solitary confinement." Hence, all

superfluous cash was devoted to experimentation. In

the course of years he grew more and more impatient

of the shackles that bound him to business routine,

and, realizing the powers within him, he drew away

gradually from purely manufacturing occupations,

determining deliberately to devote his life to inventive

work, and to depend upon its results as a means of

subsistence.



All persons who make inventions will necessarily

be more or less original in character, but to the man

who chooses to become an inventor by profession

must be conceded a mind more than ordinarily replete

with virility and originality. That these

qualities in Edison are superabundant is well known

to all who have worked with him, and, indeed, are

apparent to every one from his multiplied achievements

within the period of one generation.



If one were allowed only two words with which to

describe Edison, it is doubtful whether a close examination

of the entire dictionary would disclose any

others more suitable than "experimenter--inventor."

These would express the overruling characteristics of

his eventful career. It is as an "inventor" that he

sets himself down in the membership list of the

American Institute of Electrical Engineers. To attempt

the strict placing of these words in relation to

each other (except alphabetically) would be equal

to an endeavor to solve the old problem as to which

came first, the egg or the chicken; for although all

his inventions have been evolved through experiment,

many of his notable experiments have called

forth the exercise of highly inventive faculties in their

very inception. Investigation and experiment have

been a consuming passion, an impelling force from

within, as it were, from his petticoat days when he

collected goose-eggs and tried to hatch them out by

sitting over them himself. One might be inclined to

dismiss this trivial incident smilingly, as a mere

childish, thoughtless prank, had not subsequent

development as a child, boy, and man revealed a born

investigator with original reasoning powers that,

disdaining crooks and bends, always aimed at the

centre, and, like the flight of the bee, were accurate

and direct.



It is not surprising, therefore, that a man of this

kind should exhibit a ceaseless, absorbing desire for

knowledge, and an apparently uncontrollable tendency

to experiment on every possible occasion, even

though his last cent were spent in thus satisfying the

insatiate cravings of an inquiring mind.



During Edison's immature years, when he was

flitting about from place to place as a telegraph

operator, his experimentation was of a desultory,

hand-to-mouth character, although it was always

notable for originality, as expressed in a number of

minor useful devices produced during this period.

Small wonder, then, that at the end of these wanderings,

when he had found a place to "rest the sole of

his foot," he established a laboratory in which to

carry on his researches in a more methodical and

practical manner. In this was the beginning of the

work which has since made such a profound impression

on contemporary life.



There is nothing of the helter-skelter, slap-dash

style in Edison's experiments. Although all the

laboratory experimenters agree in the opinion that

he "tries everything," it is not merely the mixing of

a little of this, some of that, and a few drops of the

other, in the HOPE that SOMETHING will come of it.

Nor is the spirit of the laboratory work represented

in the following dialogue overheard between two

alleged carpenters picked up at random to help on a

hurry job.



"How near does she fit, Mike?"



"About an inch."



"Nail her!"



A most casual examination of any of the laboratory

records will reveal evidence of the minutest exactitude

insisted on in the conduct of experiments, irrespective

of the length of time they occupied. Edison's

instructions, always clear cut and direct, followed by

his keen oversight, admit of nothing less than implicit

observance in all details, no matter where

they may lead, and impel to the utmost minuteness

and accuracy.



To some extent there has been a popular notion

that many of Edison's successes have been due to

mere dumb fool luck--to blind, fortuitous "happenings."

Nothing could be further from the truth, for,

on the contrary, it is owing almost entirely to the

comprehensive scope of his knowledge, the breadth

of his conception, the daring originality of his methods,

and minuteness and extent of experiment, com-

bined with unwavering pertinacity, that new arts

have been created and additions made to others

already in existence. Indeed, without this tireless

minutiae, and methodical, searching spirit, it would

have been practically impossible to have produced

many of the most important of these inventions.



Needless to say, mastery of its literature is regarded

by him as a most important preliminary in

taking up any line of investigation. What others

may have done, bearing directly or collaterally on

the subject, in print, is carefully considered and

sifted to the point of exhaustion. Not that he takes

it for granted that the conclusions are correct, for

he frequently obtains vastly different results by

repeating in his own way experiments made by others

as detailed in books.



"Edison can travel along a well-used road and still

find virgin soil," remarked recently one of his most

practical experimenters, who had been working along

a certain line without attaining the desired result.

"He wanted to get a particular compound having

definite qualities, and I had tried in all sorts of ways

to produce it but with only partial success. He was

confident that it could be done, and said he would

try it himself. In doing so he followed the same path

in which I had travelled, but, by making an undreamed-of

change in one of the operations, succeeded

in producing a compound that virtually came up to

his specifications. It is not the only time I have

known this sort of thing to happen."



In speaking of Edison's method of experimenting,

another of his laboratory staff says: "He is never

hindered by theory, but resorts to actual experiment

for proof. For instance, when he conceived the idea

of pouring a complete concrete house it was universally

held that it would be impossible because the

pieces of stone in the mixture would not rise to the

level of the pouring-point, but would gravitate to a

lower plane in the soft cement. This, however, did

not hinder him from making a series of experiments

which resulted in an invention that proved conclusively

the contrary."



Having conceived some new idea and read everything

obtainable relating to the subject in general,

Edison's fertility of resource and originality come into

play. Taking one of the laboratory note-books, he

will write in it a memorandum of the experiments to

be tried, illustrated, if necessary, by sketches. This

book is then passed on to that member of the experimental

staff whose special training and experience

are best adapted to the work. Here strenuousness is

expected; and an immediate commencement of investigation

and prompt report are required. Sometimes

the subject may be such as to call for a long

line of frequent tests which necessitate patient and

accurate attention to minute details. Results must

be reported often--daily, or possibly with still greater

frequency. Edison does not forget what is going on;

but in his daily tours through the laboratory keeps

in touch with all the work that is under the hands of

his various assistants, showing by an instant grasp

of the present conditions of any experiment that he

has a full consciousness of its meaning and its reference

to his original conception.



The year 1869 saw the beginning of Edison's career

as an acknowledged inventor of commercial devices.

From the outset, an innate recognition of system

dictated the desirability and wisdom of preserving

records of his experiments and inventions. The

primitive records, covering the earliest years, were

mainly jotted down on loose sheets of paper covered

with sketches, notes, and data, pasted into large scrap-

books, or preserved in packages; but with the passing

of years and enlargement of his interests, it became

the practice to make all original laboratory

notes in large, uniform books. This course was pursued

until the Menlo Park period, when he instituted

a new regime that has been continued down to the

present day. A standard form of note-book, about

eight and a half by six inches, containing about two

hundred pages, was adopted. A number of these

books were (and are now) always to be found scattered

around in the different sections of the laboratory,

and in them have been noted by Edison all

his ideas, sketches, and memoranda. Details of the

various experiments concerning them have been set

down by his assistants from time to time.



These later laboratory note-books, of which there

are now over one thousand in the series, are eloquent

in the history they reveal of the strenuous labors of

Edison and his assistants and the vast fields of

research he has covered during the last thirty years.

They are overwhelmingly rich in biographic material,

but analysis would be a prohibitive task for one person,

and perhaps interesting only to technical readers.

Their pages cover practically every department of

science. The countless thousands of separate experiments

recorded exhibit the operations of a master

mind seeking to surprise Nature into a betrayal of

her secrets by asking her the same question in a

hundred different ways. For instance, when Edison

was investigating a certain problem of importance

many years ago, the note-books show that on this

point alone about fifteen thousand experiments and

tests were made by one of his assistants.



A most casual glance over these note-books will

illustrate the following remark, which was made to

one of the writers not long ago by a member of the

laboratory staff who has been experimenting there

for twenty years: "Edison can think of more ways

of doing a thing than any man I ever saw or heard

of. He tries everything and never lets up, even

though failure is apparently staring him in the face.

He only stops when he simply can't go any further

on that particular line. When he decides on any

mode of procedure he gives his notes to the experimenter

and lets him alone, only stepping in from

time to time to look at the operations and receive

reports of progress."



The history of the development of the telephone

transmitter, phonograph, incandescent lamp, dynamo,

electrical distributing systems from central stations,

electric railway, ore-milling, cement, motion pictures,

and a host of minor inventions may be found embedded

in the laboratory note-books. A passing

glance at a few pages of these written records will

serve to illustrate, though only to a limited extent,

the thoroughness of Edison's method. It is to be

observed that these references can be but of the most

meagre kind, and must be regarded as merely throwing

a side-light on the subject itself. For instance,

the complex problem of a practical telephone transmitter

gave rise to a series of most exhaustive experiments.

Combinations in almost infinite variety,

including gums, chemical compounds, oils, minerals,

and metals were suggested by Edison; and his assistants

were given long lists of materials to try with

reference to predetermined standards of articulation,

degrees of loudness, and perfection of hissing sounds.

The note-books contain hundreds of pages showing

that a great many thousands of experiments were

tried and passed upon. Such remarks as "N. G.";

"Pretty good"; "Whistling good, but no articulation";

"Rattly"; "Articulation, whispering, and

whistling good"; "Best to-night so far"; and others

are noted opposite the various combinations as they

were tried. Thus, one may follow the investigation

through a maze of experiments which led up to the

successful invention of the carbon button transmitter,

the vital device to give the telephone its

needed articulation and perfection.



The two hundred and odd note-books, covering the

strenuous period during which Edison was carrying

on his electric-light experiments, tell on their forty

thousand pages or more a fascinating story of the

evolution of a new art in its entirety. From the crude

beginnings, through all the varied phases of this

evolution, the operations of a master mind are apparent

from the contents of these pages, in which are

recorded the innumerable experiments, calculations,

and tests that ultimately brought light out of darkness.



The early work on a metallic conductor for lamps

gave rise to some very thorough research on melting

and alloying metals, the preparation of metallic

oxides, the coating of fine wires by immersing them

in a great variety of chemical solutions. Following

his usual custom, Edison would indicate the lines of

experiment to be followed, which were carried out

and recorded in the note-books. He himself, in

January, 1879, made personally a most minute and

searching investigation into the properties and behavior

of plating-iridium, boron, rutile, zircon, chromium,

molybdenum, and nickel, under varying degrees

of current strength, on which there may be

found in the notes about forty pages of detailed

experiments and deductions in his own handwriting,

concluding with the remark (about nickel): "This

is a great discovery for electric light in the way of

economy."



This period of research on nickel, etc., was evidently

a trying one, for after nearly a month's close

application he writes, on January 27, 1879: "Owing

to the enormous power of the light my eyes commenced

to pain after seven hours' work, and I had

to quit." On the next day appears the following

entry: "Suffered the pains of hell with my eyes last

night from 10 P.M. till 4 A.M., when got to sleep with

a big dose of morphine. Eyes getting better, and

do not pain much at 4 P.M.; but I lose to-day."



The "try everything" spirit of Edison's method is

well illustrated in this early period by a series of

about sixteen hundred resistance tests of various ores,

minerals, earths, etc., occupying over fifty pages of

one of the note-books relating to the metallic filament

for his lamps.



But, as the reader has already learned, the metallic

filament was soon laid aside in favor of carbon, and

we find in the laboratory notes an amazing record of

research and experiment conducted in the minute

and searching manner peculiar to Edison's method.

His inquiries were directed along all the various roads

leading to the desired goal, for long before he had

completed the invention of a practical lamp he realized

broadly the fundamental requirements of a successful

system of electrical distribution, and had

given instructions for the making of a great variety

of calculations which, although far in advance of the

time, were clearly foreseen by him to be vitally

important in the ultimate solution of the complicated

problem. Thus we find many hundreds of pages of

the note-books covered with computations and

calculations by Mr. Upton, not only on the numerous

ramifications of the projected system and

comparisons with gas, but also on proposed forms of

dynamos and the proposed station in New York. A

mere recital by titles of the vast number of experiments

and tests on carbons, lamps, dynamos, armatures,

commutators, windings, systems, regulators,

sockets, vacuum-pumps, and the thousand and one

details relating to the subject in general, originated

by Edison, and methodically and systematically carried

on under his general direction, would fill a

great many pages here, and even then would serve

only to convey a confused impression of ceaseless

probing.



It is possible only to a broad, comprehensive mind

well stored with knowledge, and backed with resistless,

boundless energy, that such a diversified series

of experiments and investigations could be carried

on simultaneously and assimilated, even though they

should relate to a class of phenomena already understood

and well defined. But if we pause to consider

that the commercial subdivision of the electric current

(which was virtually an invention made to order)

involved the solution of problems so unprecedented

that even they themselves had to be created, we cannot

but conclude that the afflatus of innate genius

played an important part in the unique methods of

investigation instituted by Edison at that and other

times.



The idea of attributing great successes to "genius"

has always been repudiated by Edison, as evidenced

by his historic remark that "Genius is 1 per cent.

inspiration and 99 per cent. perspiration." Again,

in a conversation many years ago at the laboratory

between Edison, Batchelor, and E. H. Johnson, the

latter made allusion to Edison's genius as evidenced

by some of his achievements, when Edison replied:



"Stuff! I tell you genius is hard work, stick-to-it-

iveness, and common sense."



"Yes," said Johnson, "I admit there is all that to

it, but there's still more. Batch and I have those

qualifications, but although we knew quite a lot about

telephones, and worked hard, we couldn't invent a

brand-new non-infringing telephone receiver as you

did when Gouraud cabled for one. Then, how about

the subdivision of the electric light?"



"Electric current," corrected Edison.



"True," continued Johnson; "you were the one

to make that very distinction. The scientific world

had been working hard on subdivision for years,

using what appeared to be common sense. Results

worse than nil. Then you come along, and about the

first thing you do, after looking the ground over, is

to start off in the opposite direction, which subsequently

proves to be the only possible way to reach

the goal. It seems to me that this is pretty close

to the dictionary definition of genius."



It is said that Edison replied rather incoherently

and changed the topic of conversation.



This innate modesty, however, does not prevent

Edison from recognizing and classifying his own

methods of investigation. In a conversation with

two old associates recently (April, 1909), he remarked:

"It has been said of me that my methods are empirical.

That is true only so far as chemistry is concerned.

Did you ever realize that practically all industrial

chemistry is colloidal in its nature? Hard

rubber, celluloid, glass, soap, paper, and lots of others,

all have to deal with amorphous substances, as to

which comparatively little has been really settled.

My methods are similar to those followed by Luther

Burbank. He plants an acre, and when this is in

bloom he inspects it. He has a sharp eye, and can

pick out of thousands a single plant that has promise

of what he wants. From this he gets the seed, and

uses his skill and knowledge in producing from it a

number of new plants which, on development, furnish

the means of propagating an improved variety

in large quantity. So, when I am after a chemical

result that I have in mind, I may make hundreds or

thousands of experiments out of which there may be

one that promises results in the right direction. This

I follow up to its legitimate conclusion, discarding

the others, and usually get what I am after. There is

no doubt about this being empirical; but when it

comes to problems of a mechanical nature, I want

to tell you that all I've ever tackled and solved have

been done by hard, logical thinking." The intense

earnestness and emphasis with which this was said

were very impressive to the auditors. This empirical

method may perhaps be better illustrated by a specific

example. During the latter part of the storage

battery investigations, after the form of positive

element had been determined upon, it became necessary

to ascertain what definite proportions and what quality

of nickel hydrate and nickel flake would give the

best results. A series of positive tubes were filled

with the two materials in different proportions--say,

nine parts hydrate to one of flake; eight parts

hydrate to two of flake; seven parts hydrate to three of

flake, and so on through varying proportions. Three

sets of each of these positives were made, and all put

into separate test tubes with a uniform type of negative

element. These were carried through a long series

of charges and discharges under strict test conditions.

From the tabulated results of hundreds of tests there

were selected three that showed the best results.

These, however, showed only the superiority of cer-

tain PROPORTIONS of the materials. The next step would

be to find out the best QUALITY. Now, as there are

several hundred variations in the quality of nickel

flake, and perhaps a thousand ways to make the

hydrate, it will be realized that Edison's methods led

to stupendous detail, for these tests embraced a trial

of all the qualities of both materials in the three

proportions found to be most suitable. Among these

many thousands of experiments any that showed

extraordinary results were again elaborated by still

further series of tests, until Edison was satisfied that

he had obtained the best result in that particular line.



The laboratory note-books do not always tell the

whole story or meaning of an experiment that may

be briefly outlined on one of their pages. For example,

the early filament made of a mixture of lampblack

and tar is merely a suggestion in the notes, but

its making afforded an example of Edison's

pertinacity. These materials, when mixed, became a

friable mass, which he had found could be brought

into such a cohesive, putty-like state by manipulation,

as to be capable of being rolled out into filaments as

fine as seven-thousandths of an inch in cross-section.

One of the laboratory assistants was told to make some

of this mixture, knead it, and roll some filaments.

After a time he brought the mass to Edison, and said:



"There's something wrong about this, for it crumbles

even after manipulating it with my fingers."



"How long did you knead it?" said Edison.



"Oh! more than an hour," replied the assistant.



"Well, just keep on for a few hours more and it

will come out all right," was the rejoinder. And this

proved to be correct, for, after a prolonged kneading

and rolling, the mass changed into a cohesive, stringy,

homogeneous putty. It was from a mixture of this

kind that spiral filaments were made and used in

some of the earliest forms of successful incandescent

lamps; indeed, they are described and illustrated in

Edison's fundamental lamp patent (No. 223,898).



The present narrative would assume the proportions

of a history of the incandescent lamp, should

the authors attempt to follow Edison's investigations

through the thousands of pages of note-books away

back in the eighties and early nineties. Improvement

of the lamp was constantly in his mind all those years,

and besides the vast amount of detail experimental

work he laid out for his assistants, he carried on a great

deal of research personally. Sometimes whole books

are filled in his own handwriting with records of

experiments showing every conceivable variation of some

particular line of inquiry; each trial bearing some

terse comment expressive of results. In one book

appear the details of one of these experiments on

September 3, 1891, at 4.30 A.M., with the comment:

"Brought up lamp higher than a 16-c.p. 240 was ever

brought before--Hurrah!" Notwithstanding the late

hour, he turns over to the next page and goes on to

write his deductions from this result as compared

with those previously obtained. Proceeding day by

day, as appears by this same book, he follows up another

line of investigation on lamps, apparently full

of difficulty, for after one hundred and thirty-two

other recorded experiments we find this note: "Saturday

3.30 went home disgusted with incandescent

lamps." This feeling was evidently evanescent, for

on the succeeding Monday the work was continued

and carried on by him as keenly as before, as shown

by the next batch of notes.



This is the only instance showing any indication of

impatience that the authors have found in looking

through the enormous mass of laboratory notes. All

his assistants agree that Edison is the most patient,

tireless experimenter that could be conceived of.

Failures do not distress him; indeed, he regards them

as always useful, as may be gathered from the following,

related by Dr. E. G. Acheson, formerly one

of his staff: "I once made an experiment in Edison's

laboratory at Menlo Park during the latter part of

1880, and the results were not as looked for. I

considered the experiment a perfect failure, and while

bemoaning the results of this apparent failure Mr.

Edison entered, and, after learning the facts of the

case, cheerfully remarked that I should not look

upon it as a failure, for he considered every experiment

a success, as in all cases it cleared up the atmosphere,

and even though it failed to accomplish the

results sought for, it should prove a valuable lesson

for guidance in future work. I believe that Mr.

Edison's success as an experimenter was, to a large

extent, due to this happy view of all experiments."



Edison has frequently remarked that out of a hundred

experiments he does not expect more than one

to be successful, and as to that one he is always

suspicious until frequent repetition has verified the

original results.



This patient, optimistic view of the outcome of

experiments has remained part of his character down

to this day, just as his painstaking, minute, incisive

methods are still unchanged. But to the careless,

stupid, or lazy person he is a terror for the short

time they remain around him. Honest mistakes may

be tolerated, but not carelessness, incompetence, or

lack of attention to business. In such cases Edison

is apt to express himself freely and forcibly, as when

he was asked why he had parted with a certain man,

he said: "Oh, he was so slow that it would take him

half an hour to get out of the field of a microscope."

Another instance will be illustrative. Soon after the

Brockton (Massachusetts) central station was started

in operation many years ago, he wrote a note to Mr.

W. S. Andrews, containing suggestions as to future

stations, part of which related to the various employees

and their duties. After outlining the duties

of the meter man, Edison says: "I should not take

too young a man for this, say, a man from twenty-

three to thirty years old, bright and businesslike.

Don't want any one who yearns to enter a laboratory

and experiment. We have a bad case of that at

Brockton; he neglects business to potter. What we

want is a good lamp average and no unprofitable

customer. You should have these men on probation

and subject to passing an examination by me.

This will wake them up."



Edison's examinations are no joke, according to Mr.

J. H. Vail, formerly one of the Menlo Park staff. "I

wanted a job," he said, "and was ambitious to take

charge of the dynamo-room. Mr. Edison led me to

a heap of junk in a corner and said: `Put that to-

gether and let me know when it's running.' I didn't

know what it was, but received a liberal education in

finding out. It proved to be a dynamo, which I

finally succeeded in assembling and running. I got

the job." Another man who succeeded in winning a

place as assistant was Mr. John F. Ott, who has remained

in his employ for over forty years. In 1869,

when Edison was occupying his first manufacturing

shop (the third floor of a small building in Newark),

he wanted a first-class mechanician, and Mr. Ott was

sent to him. "He was then an ordinary-looking young

fellow," says Mr. Ott, "dirty as any of the other

workmen, unkempt, and not much better dressed

than a tramp, but I immediately felt that there was

a great deal in him." This is the conversation that

ensued, led by Mr. Edison's question:



"What do you want?"



" Work."



"Can you make this machine work?" (exhibiting

it and explaining its details).



"Yes."



"Are you sure?"



"Well, you needn't pay me if I don't."



And thus Mr. Ott went to work and succeeded in

accomplishing the results desired. Two weeks afterward

Mr. Edison put him in charge of the shop.



Edison's life fairly teems with instances of unruffled

patience in the pursuit of experiments. When

he feels thoroughly impressed with the possibility of

accomplishing a certain thing, he will settle down

composedly to investigate it to the end.



This is well illustrated in a story relating to his

invention of the type of storage battery bearing his

name. Mr. W. S. Mallory, one of his closest associates

for many years, is the authority for the following:

"When Mr. Edison decided to shut down the ore-

milling plant at Edison, New Jersey, in which I had

been associated with him, it became a problem as to

what he could profitably take up next, and we had

several discussions about it. He finally thought that

a good storage battery was a great requisite, and

decided to try and devise a new type, for he declared

emphatically he would make no battery requiring

sulphuric acid. After a little thought he conceived

the nickel-iron idea, and started to work at once

with characteristic energy. About 7 or 7.30 A.M. he

would go down to the laboratory and experiment,

only stopping for a short time at noon to eat a lunch

sent down from the house. About 6 o'clock the carriage

would call to take him to dinner, from which he

would return by 7.30 or 8 o'clock to resume work.

The carriage came again at midnight to take him

home, but frequently had to wait until 2 or 3 o'clock,

and sometimes return without him, as he had decided

to continue all night.



"This had been going on more than five months,

seven days a week, when I was called down to the

laboratory to see him. I found him at a bench about

three feet wide and twelve to fifteen feet long, on which

there were hundreds of little test cells that had been

made up by his corps of chemists and experimenters.

He was seated at this bench testing, figuring, and

planning. I then learned that he had thus made

over nine thousand experiments in trying to devise

this new type of storage battery, but had not produced

a single thing that promised to solve the question.

In view of this immense amount of thought

and labor, my sympathy got the better of my judgment,

and I said: `Isn't it a shame that with the

tremendous amount of work you have done you

haven't been able to get any results?' Edison turned

on me like a flash, and with a smile replied: `Results!

Why, man, I have gotten a lot of results! I know

several thousand things that won't work.'



"At that time he sent me out West on a special

mission. On my return, a few weeks later, his

experiments had run up to over ten thousand, but he

had discovered the missing link in the combination

sought for. Of course, we all remember how the

battery was completed and put on the market.

Then, because he was dissatisfied with it, he stopped

the sales and commenced a new line of investigation,

which has recently culminated successfully. I

shouldn't wonder if his experiments on the battery

ran up pretty near to fifty thousand, for they fill

more than one hundred and fifty of the note-books,

to say nothing of some thousands of tests in curve

sheets."



Although Edison has an absolute disregard for the

total outlay of money in investigation, he is particular

to keep down the cost of individual experiments to a

minimum, for, as he observed to one of his assistants:

"A good many inventors try to develop things life-

size, and thus spend all their money, instead of first

experimenting more freely on a small scale." To

Edison life is not only a grand opportunity to find

out things by experiment, but, when found, to improve

them by further experiment. One night, after

receiving a satisfactory report of progress from Mr.

Mason, superintendent of the cement plant, he said:

"The only way to keep ahead of the procession is to

experiment. If you don't, the other fellow will.

When there's no experimenting there's no progress.

Stop experimenting and you go backward. If anything

goes wrong, experiment until you get to the

very bottom of the trouble."



It is easy to realize, therefore, that a character so

thoroughly permeated with these ideas is not apt to

stop and figure out expense when in hot pursuit of

some desired object. When that object has been

attained, however, and it passes from the experimental

to the commercial stage, Edison's monetary views

again come into strong play, but they take a

diametrically opposite position, for he then begins

immediately to plan the extreme of economy in the

production of the article. A thousand and one instances

could be quoted in illustration; but as they

would tend to change the form of this narrative into

a history of economy in manufacture, it will suffice

to mention but one, and that a recent occurrence,

which serves to illustrate how closely he keeps in

touch with everything, and also how the inventive

faculty and instinct of commercial economy run

close together. It was during Edison's winter stay

in Florida, in March, 1909. He had reports sent to

him daily from various places, and studied them

carefully, for he would write frequently with comments,

instructions, and suggestions; and in one

case, commenting on the oiling system at the cement

plant, he wrote: "Your oil losses are now getting

lower, I see." Then, after suggesting some changes

to reduce them still further, he went on to say:

"Here is a chance to save a mill per barrel based on

your regular daily output."



This thorough consideration of the smallest detail

is essentially characteristic of Edison, not only in

economy of manufacture, but in all his work, no matter

of what kind, whether it be experimenting,

investigating, testing, or engineering. To follow him

through the labyrinthine paths of investigation

contained in the great array of laboratory note-books is

to become involved in a mass of minutely detailed

searches which seek to penetrate the inmost recesses

of nature by an ultimate analysis of an infinite variety

of parts. As the reader will obtain a fuller comprehension

of this idea, and of Edison's methods, by concrete

illustration rather than by generalization, the

authors have thought it well to select at random

two typical instances of specific investigations out of

the thousands that are scattered through the notebooks.

These will be found in the following extracts

from one of the note-books, and consist of Edison's

instructions to be carried out in detail by his

experimenters:





"Take, say, 25 lbs. hard Cuban asphalt and separate all

the different hydrocarbons, etc., as far as possible by

means of solvents. It will be necessary first to dissolve

everything out by, say, hot turpentine, then successively

treat the residue with bisulphide carbon, benzol, ether,

chloroform, naphtha, toluol, alcohol, and other probable

solvents. After you can go no further, distil off all the

solvents so the asphalt material has a tar-like consistency.

Be sure all the ash is out of the turpentine portion; now,

after distilling the turpentine off, act on the residue with

all the solvents that were used on the residue, using for

the first the solvent which is least likely to dissolve a great

part of it. By thus manipulating the various solvents

you will be enabled probably to separate the crude

asphalt into several distinct hydrocarbons. Put each in

a bottle after it has been dried, and label the bottle with

the process, etc., so we may be able to duplicate it; also

give bottle a number and describe everything fully in

note-book."



" Destructively distil the following substances down to

a point just short of carbonization, so that the residuum

can be taken out of the retort, powdered, and acted on

by all the solvents just as the asphalt in previous page.

The distillation should be carried to, say, 600 degrees or 700 degrees

Fahr., but not continued long enough to wholly reduce

mass to charcoal, but always run to blackness. Separate

the residuum in as many definite parts as possible, bottle

and label, and keep accurate records as to process,

weights, etc., so a reproduction of the experiment can at

any time be made: Gelatine, 4 lbs.; asphalt, hard

Cuban, 10 lbs.; coal-tar or pitch, 10 lbs.; wood-pitch,

10 lbs.; Syrian asphalt, 10 lbs.; bituminous coal, 10 lbs.;

cane-sugar, 10 lbs.; glucose, 10 lbs.; dextrine, 10 lbs.;

glycerine, 10 lbs.; tartaric acid, 5 lbs.; gum guiac, 5 lbs.;

gum amber, 3 lbs.; gum tragacanth, 3 Lbs.; aniline red,

1 lb.; aniline oil, 1 lb.; crude anthracene, 5 lbs.; petroleum

pitch, 10 lbs.; albumen from eggs, 2 lbs.; tar from

passing chlorine through aniline oil, 2 lbs.; citric acid,

5 lbs.; sawdust of boxwood, 3 lbs.; starch, 5 lbs.; shellac,

3 lbs.; gum Arabic, 5 lbs.; castor oil, 5 lbs."



The empirical nature of his method will be apparent

from an examination of the above items; but in pur-

suing it he leaves all uncertainty behind and, trusting

nothing to theory, he acquires absolute knowledge.

Whatever may be the mental processes by which he

arrives at the starting-point of any specific line of

research, the final results almost invariably prove

that he does not plunge in at random; indeed, as an

old associate remarked: "When Edison takes up

any proposition in natural science, his perceptions

seem to be elementally broad and analytical, that

is to say, in addition to the knowledge he has

acquired from books and observation, he appears to

have an intuitive apprehension of the general order

of things, as they might be supposed to exist in

natural relation to each other. It has always seemed

to me that he goes to the core of things at once."



Although nothing less than results from actual experiments

are acceptable to him as established facts,

this view of Edison may also account for his peculiar

and somewhat weird ability to "guess" correctly, a

faculty which has frequently enabled him to take

short cuts to lines of investigation whose outcome has

verified in a most remarkable degree statements

apparently made offhand and without calculation.

Mr. Upton says: "One of the main impressions left

upon me, after knowing Mr. Edison for many years,

is the marvellous accuracy of his guesses. He will

see the general nature of a result long before it can

be reached by mathematical calculation." This was

supplemented by one of his engineering staff, who

remarked: "Mr. Edison can guess better than a

good many men can figure, and so far as my experience

goes, I have found that he is almost invariably

correct. His guess is more than a mere starting-

point, and often turns out to be the final solution of

a problem. I can only account for it by his remarkable

insight and wonderful natural sense of the proportion

of things, in addition to which he seems to

carry in his head determining factors of all kinds,

and has the ability to apply them instantly in

considering any mechanical problem."



While this mysterious intuitive power has been of

the greatest advantage in connection with the vast

number of technical problems that have entered into

his life-work, there have been many remarkable instances

in which it has seemed little less than prophecy,

and it is deemed worth while to digress to the extent

of relating two of them. One day in the summer of

1881, when the incandescent lamp-industry was still

in swaddling clothes, Edison was seated in the room

of Major Eaton, vice-president of the Edison Electric

Light Company, talking over business matters, when

Mr. Upton came in from the lamp factory at Menlo

Park, and said: "Well, Mr. Edison, we completed a

thousand lamps to-day." Edison looked up and

said "Good," then relapsed into a thoughtful mood.

In about two minutes he raised his head, and said:

"Upton, in fifteen years you will be making forty

thousand lamps a day." None of those present

ventured to make any remark on this assertion,

although all felt that it was merely a random guess,

based on the sanguine dream of an inventor. The

business had not then really made a start, and being

entirely new was without precedent upon which to

base any such statement, but, as a matter of fact, the

records of the lamp factory show that in 1896 its

daily output of lamps was actually about forty

thousand.



The other instance referred to occurred shortly

after the Edison Machine Works was moved up to

Schenectady, in 1886. One day, when he was at the

works, Edison sat down and wrote on a sheet of paper

fifteen separate predictions of the growth and future

of the electrical business. Notwithstanding the fact

that the industry was then in an immature state, and

that the great boom did not set in until a few years

afterward, twelve of these predictions have been fully

verified by the enormous growth and development in

all branches of the art.



What the explanation of this gift, power, or intuition

may be, is perhaps better left to the psychologist

to speculate upon. If one were to ask Edison,

he would probably say, "Hard work, not too much

sleep, and free use of the imagination." Whether or

not it would be possible for the average mortal to

arrive at such perfection of "guessing" by faithfully

following this formula, even reinforced by the Edison

recipe for stimulating a slow imagination with pastry,

is open for demonstration.



Somewhat allied to this curious faculty is another

no less remarkable, and that is, the ability to point

out instantly an error in a mass of reported experimental

results. While many instances could be definitely

named, a typical one, related by Mr. J. D.

Flack, formerly master mechanic at the lamp factory,

may be quoted: "During the many years of lamp

experimentation, batches of lamps were sent to the

photometer department for test, and Edison would

examine the tabulated test sheets. He ran over

every item of the tabulations rapidly, and, apparently

without any calculation whatever, would check off

errors as fast as he came to them, saying: `You have

made a mistake; try this one over.' In every case

the second test proved that he was right. This wonderful

aptitude for infallibly locating an error without

an instant's hesitation for mental calculation, has

always appealed to me very forcibly."



The ability to detect errors quickly in a series of

experiments is one of the things that has enabled

Edison to accomplish such a vast amount of work

as the records show. Examples of the minuteness of

detail into which his researches extend have already

been mentioned, and as there are always a number

of such investigations in progress at the laboratory,

this ability stands Edison in good stead, for he is

thus enabled to follow, and, if necessary, correct each

one step by step. In this he is aided by the great

powers of a mind that is able to free itself from

absorbed concentration on the details of one problem,

and instantly to shift over and become deeply and

intelligently concentrated in another and entirely

different one. For instance, he may have been busy

for hours on chemical experiments, and be called

upon suddenly to determine some mechanical questions.

The complete and easy transition is the constant

wonder of his associates, for there is no confusion

of ideas resulting from these quick changes,

no hesitation or apparent effort, but a plunge into

the midst of the new subject, and an instant acquaint-

ance with all its details, as if he had been studying

it for hours.



A good stiff difficulty--one which may, perhaps, appear

to be an unsurmountable obstacle--only serves to

make Edison cheerful, and brings out variations of his

methods in experimenting. Such an occurrence will

start him thinking, which soon gives rise to a line

of suggestions for approaching the trouble from various

sides; or he will sit down and write out a series

of eliminations, additions, or changes to be worked

out and reported upon, with such variations as may

suggest themselves during their progress. It is at

such times as these that his unfailing patience and

tremendous resourcefulness are in evidence. Ideas and

expedients are poured forth in a torrent, and although

some of them have temporarily appeared to

the staff to be ridiculous or irrelevant, they have

frequently turned out to be the ones leading to a

correct solution of the trouble.



Edison's inexhaustible resourcefulness and fertility

of ideas have contributed largely to his great

success, and have ever been a cause of amazement

to those around him. Frequently, when it

would seem to others that the extreme end of an

apparently blind alley had been reached, and that it

was impossible to proceed further, he has shown that

there were several ways out of it. Examples without

number could be quoted, but one must suffice by way

of illustration. During the progress of the ore-milling

work at Edison, it became desirable to carry on

a certain operation by some special machinery. He

requested the proper person on his engineering staff

to think this matter up and submit a few sketches

of what he would propose to do. He brought three

drawings to Edison, who examined them and said

none of them would answer. The engineer remarked

that it was too bad, for there was no other way to

do it. Mr. Edison turned to him quickly, and said:

"Do you mean to say that these drawings represent

the only way to do this work?" To which he received

the reply: "I certainly do." Edison said

nothing. This happened on a Saturday. He followed

his usual custom of spending Sunday at home

in Orange. When he returned to the works on

Monday morning, he took with him sketches he had

made, showing FORTY-EIGHT other ways of accomplishing

the desired operation, and laid them on the engineer's

desk without a word. Subsequently one of

these ideas, with modifications suggested by some of

the others, was put into successful practice.



Difficulties seem to have a peculiar charm for

Edison, whether they relate to large or small things;

and although the larger matters have contributed

most to the history of the arts, the same carefulness

of thought has often been the means of leading to

improvements of permanent advantage even in

minor details. For instance, in the very earliest

days of electric lighting, the safe insulation of two

bare wires fastened together was a serious problem

that was solved by him. An iron pot over a fire, some

insulating material melted therein, and narrow strips

of linen drawn through it by means of a wooden

clamp, furnished a readily applied and adhesive

insulation, which was just as perfect for the purpose

as the regular and now well-known insulating tape,

of which it was the forerunner.



Dubious results are not tolerated for a moment

in Edison's experimental work. Rather than pass

upon an uncertainty, the experiment will be dissected

and checked minutely in order to obtain absolute

knowledge, pro and con. This searching method

is followed not only in chemical or other investigations,

into which complexities might naturally enter,

but also in more mechanical questions, where simplicity

of construction might naturally seem to preclude

possibilities of uncertainty. For instance, at

the time when he was making strenuous endeavors

to obtain copper wire of high conductivity, strict

laboratory tests were made of samples sent by

manufacturers. One of these samples tested out poorer

than a previous lot furnished from the same factory.

A report of this to Edison brought the following

note: "Perhaps the ---- wire had a bad spot in it.

Please cut it up into lengths and test each one and

send results to me immediately." Possibly the electrical

fraternity does not realize that this earnest

work of Edison, twenty-eight years ago, resulted in

the establishment of the high quality of copper wire

that has been the recognized standard since that

time. Says Edison on this point: "I furnished the

expert and apparatus to the Ansonia Brass and Copper

Company in 1883, and he is there yet. It was this

expert and this company who pioneered high-conductivity

copper for the electrical trade."



Nor is it generally appreciated in the industry that

the adoption of what is now regarded as a most ob-

vious proposition--the high-economy incandescent

lamp--was the result of that characteristic foresight

which there has been occasion to mention frequently

in the course of this narrative, together with the

courage and "horse-sense" which have always been

displayed by the inventor in his persistent pushing

out with far-reaching ideas, in the face of pessimistic

opinions. As is well known, the lamps of the first

ten or twelve years of incandescent lighting were of

low economy, but had long life. Edison's study of

the subject had led him to the conviction that the

greatest growth of the electric-lighting industry

would be favored by a lamp taking less current, but

having shorter, though commercially economical life;

and after gradually making improvements along this

line he developed, finally, a type of high-economy

lamp which would introduce a most radical change

in existing conditions, and lead ultimately to highly

advantageous results. His start on this lamp, and

an expressed desire to have it manufactured for regular

use, filled even some of his business associates

with dismay, for they could see nothing but disaster

ahead in forcing such a lamp on the market. His

persistence and profound conviction of the ultimate

results were so strong and his arguments so sound,

however, that the campaign was entered upon.

Although it took two or three years to convince the

public of the correctness of his views, the idea gradually

took strong root, and has now become an integral

principle of the business.



In this connection it may be noted that with

remarkable prescience Edison saw the coming of the

modern lamps of to-day, which, by reason of their

small consumption of energy to produce a given

candle-power, have dismayed central-station managers.

A few years ago a consumption of 3.1 watts

per candle-power might safely be assumed as an

excellent average, and many stations fixed their

rates and business on such a basis. The results on

income when the consumption, as in the new metallic-

filament lamps, drops to 1.25 watts per candle can

readily be imagined. Edison has insisted that central

stations are selling light and not current; and

he points to the predicament now confronting them

as truth of his assertion that when selling light they

share in all the benefits of improvement, but that

when they sell current the consumer gets all those

benefits without division. The dilemma is encountered

by central stations in a bewildered way,

as a novel and unexpected experience; but Edison

foresaw the situation and warned against it long ago.

It is one of the greatest gifts of statesmanship to see

new social problems years before they arise and

solve them in advance. It is one of the greatest

attributes of invention to foresee and meet its own

problems in exactly the same way.


