





CHAPTER XVIII



THE ELECTRIC RAILWAY



EDISON had no sooner designed his dynamo in

1879 than he adopted the same form of machine

for use as a motor. The two are shown in the Scientific

American of October 18, 1879, and are alike, except

that the dynamo is vertical and the motor lies in a

horizontal position, the article remarking: "Its construction

differs but slightly from the electric generator."

This was but an evidence of his early appreciation

of the importance of electricity as a motive power;

but it will probably surprise many people to know

that he was the inventor of an electric motor before

he perfected his incandescent lamp. His interest in

the subject went back to his connection with General

Lefferts in the days of the evolution of the stock

ticker. While Edison was carrying on his shop at

Newark, New Jersey, there was considerable excitement

in electrical circles over the Payne motor, in

regard to the alleged performance of which Governor

Cornell of New York and other wealthy capitalists

were quite enthusiastic. Payne had a shop in Newark,

and in one small room was the motor, weighing perhaps

six hundred pounds. It was of circular form,

incased in iron, with the ends of several small magnets

sticking through the floor. A pulley and belt, con-

nected to a circular saw larger than the motor,

permitted large logs of oak timber to be sawed with ease

with the use of two small cells of battery. Edison's

friend, General Lefferts, had become excited and was

determined to invest a large sum of money in the

motor company, but knowing Edison's intimate

familiarity with all electrical subjects he was wise

enough to ask his young expert to go and see the

motor with him. At an appointed hour Edison went

to the office of the motor company and found there

the venerable Professor Morse, Governor Cornell,

General Lefferts, and many others who had been

invited to witness a performance of the motor. They

all proceeded to the room where the motor was at

work. Payne put a wire in the binding-post of the

battery, the motor started, and an assistant began

sawing a heavy oak log. It worked beautifully, and so

great was the power developed, apparently, from the

small battery, that Morse exclaimed: "I am thankful

that I have lived to see this day." But Edison

kept a close watch on the motor. The results were

so foreign to his experience that he knew there was

a trick in it. He soon discovered it. While holding

his hand on the frame of the motor he noticed a

tremble coincident with the exhaust of an engine

across the alleyway, and he then knew that the

power came from the engine by a belt under the floor,

shifted on and off by a magnet, the other magnets

being a blind. He whispered to the General to put

his hand on the frame of the motor, watch the

exhaust, and note the coincident tremor. The General

did so, and in about fifteen seconds he said: "Well,

Edison, I must go now. This thing is a fraud." And

thus he saved his money, although others not so

shrewdly advised were easily persuaded to invest by

such a demonstration.



A few years later, in 1878, Edison went to Wyoming

with a group of astronomers, to test his tasimeter during

an eclipse of the sun, and saw the land white to harvest.

He noticed the long hauls to market or elevator

that the farmers had to make with their loads of grain

at great expense, and conceived the idea that as ordinary

steam-railroad service was too costly, light

electric railways might be constructed that could

be operated automatically over simple tracks, the

propelling motors being controlled at various points.

Cheap to build and cheap to maintain, such roads would

be a great boon to the newer farming regions of the

West, where the highways were still of the crudest character,

and where transportation was the gravest difficulty

with which the settlers had to contend. The

plan seems to have haunted him, and he had no sooner

worked out a generator and motor that owing to their

low internal resistance could be operated efficiently,

than he turned his hand to the practical trial of such

a railroad, applicable to both the haulage of freight

and the transportation of passengers. Early in 1880,

when the tremendous rush of work involved in the

invention of the incandescent lamp intermitted a little,

he began the construction of a stretch of track

close to the Menlo Park laboratory, and at the same

time built an electric locomotive to operate over it.



This is a fitting stage at which to review briefly

what had been done in electric traction up to that

date. There was absolutely no art, but there had

been a number of sporadic and very interesting

experiments made. The honor of the first attempt of

any kind appears to rest with this country and with

Thomas Davenport, a self-trained blacksmith, of

Brandon, Vermont, who made a small model of a

circular electric railway and cars in 1834, and

exhibited it the following year in Springfield, Boston,

and other cities. Of course he depended upon

batteries for current, but the fundamental idea was

embodied of using the track for the circuit, one rail

being positive and the other negative, and the motor

being placed across or between them in multiple arc

to receive the current. Such are also practically the

methods of to-day. The little model was in good

preservation up to the year 1900, when, being shipped

to the Paris Exposition, it was lost, the steamer that

carried it foundering in mid-ocean. The very broad

patent taken out by this simple mechanic, so far

ahead of his times, was the first one issued in America

for an electric motor. Davenport was also the first

man to apply electric power to the printing-press,

in 1840. In his traction work he had a close second

in Robert Davidson, of Aberdeen, Scotland, who in

1839 operated both a lathe and a small locomotive

with the motor he had invented. His was the credit

of first actually carrying passengers--two at a time,

over a rough plank road--while it is said that his was

the first motor to be tried on real tracks, those of

the Edinburgh-Glasgow road, making a speed of four

miles an hour.



The curse of this work and of all that succeeded it

for a score of years was the necessity of depending

upon chemical batteries for current, the machine

usually being self-contained and hauling the batteries

along with itself, as in the case of the famous

Page experiments in April, 1851, when a speed of

nineteen miles an hour was attained on the line of

the Washington & Baltimore road. To this unfruitful

period belonged, however, the crude idea of taking

the current from a stationary source of power by

means of an overhead contact, which has found its

practical evolution in the modern ubiquitous trolley;

although the patent for this, based on his caveat of

1879, was granted several years later than that to

Stephen D. Field, for the combination of an electric

motor operated by means of a current from a stationary

dynamo or source of electricity conducted

through the rails. As a matter of fact, in 1856 and

again in 1875, George F. Green, a jobbing machinist,

of Kalamazoo, Michigan, built small cars and tracks

to which current was fed from a distant battery,

enough energy being utilized to haul one hundred

pounds of freight or one passenger up and down a

"road" two hundred feet long. All the work prior

to the development of the dynamo as a source of

current was sporadic and spasmodic, and cannot be

said to have left any trace on the art, though it

offered many suggestions as to operative methods.



The close of the same decade of the nineteenth

century that saw the electric light brought to perfection,

saw also the realization in practice of all the

hopes of fifty years as to electric traction. Both

utilizations depended upon the supply of current now

cheaply obtainable from the dynamo. These arts

were indeed twins, feeding at inexhaustible breasts.

In 1879, at the Berlin Exhibition, the distinguished

firm of Siemens, to whose ingenuity and enterprise

electrical development owes so much, installed a road

about one-third of a mile in length, over which the

locomotive hauled a train of three small cars at a

speed of about eight miles an hour, carrying some

twenty persons every trip. Current was fed from a

dynamo to the motor through a central third rail, the

two outer rails being joined together as the negative

or return circuit. Primitive but essentially successful,

this little road made a profound impression on the

minds of many inventors and engineers, and marked

the real beginning of the great new era, which has

already seen electricity applied to the operation of

main lines of trunk railways. But it is not to be supposed

that on the part of the public there was any

great amount of faith then discernible; and for some

years the pioneers had great difficulty, especially in

this country, in raising money for their early modest

experiments. Of the general conditions at this

moment Frank J. Sprague says in an article in the

Century Magazine of July, 1905, on the creation of

the new art: "Edison was perhaps nearer the verge

of great electric-railway possibilities than any other

American. In the face of much adverse criticism

he had developed the essentials of the low-internal-

resistance dynamo with high-resistance field, and

many of the essential features of multiple-arc

distribution, and in 1880 he built a small road at his

laboratory at Menlo Park."



On May 13th of the year named this interesting

road went into operation as the result of hard and

hurried work of preparation during the spring months.

The first track was about a third of a mile in length,

starting from the shops, following a country road, passing

around a hill at the rear and curving home, in the

general form of the letter "U." The rails were very

light. Charles T. Hughes, who went with Edison in

1879, and was in charge of much of the work, states

that they were "second" street-car rails, insulated

with tar canvas paper and things of that sort--

"asphalt." They were spiked down on ordinary

sleepers laid upon the natural grade, and the gauge

was about three feet six inches. At one point the

grade dropped some sixty feet in a distance of three

hundred, and the curves were of recklessly short

radius. The dynamos supplying current to the road

were originally two of the standard size "Z" machines

then being made at the laboratory, popularly known

throughout the Edison ranks as "Longwaisted Mary

Anns," and the circuits from these were carried out

to the rails by underground conductors. They were

not large--about twelve horse-power each--generating

seventy-five amperes of current at one hundred and

ten volts, so that not quite twenty-five horse-power

of electrical energy was available for propulsion.



The locomotive built while the roadbed was getting

ready was a four-wheeled iron truck, an ordinary flat

dump-car about six feet long and four feet wide,

upon which was mounted a "Z" dynamo used as a

motor, so that it had a capacity of about twelve

horsepower. This machine was laid on its side, with the

armature end coming out at the front of the

locomotive, and the motive power was applied to the

driving-axle by a cumbersome series of friction pulleys.

Each wheel of the locomotive had a metal rim

and a centre web of wood or papier-mache, and the

current picked up by one set of wheels was carried

through contact brushes and a brass hub to the

motor; the circuit back to the track, or other rail,

being closed through the other wheels in a similar

manner. The motor had its field-magnet circuit in

permanent connection as a shunt across the rails,

protected by a crude bare copper-wire safety-catch.

A switch in the armature circuit enabled the motorman

to reverse the direction of travel by reversing the

current flow through the armature coils.



Things went fairly well for a time on that memorable

Thursday afternoon, when all the laboratory

force made high holiday and scrambled for foothold

on the locomotive for a trip; but the friction gearing

was not equal to the sudden strain put upon it during

one run and went to pieces. Some years later, also,

Daft again tried friction gear in his historical experiments

on the Manhattan Elevated road, but the results

were attended with no greater success. The

next resort of Edison was to belts, the armature shafting

belted to a countershaft on the locomotive frame,

and the countershaft belted to a pulley on the car-

axle. The lever which threw the former friction gear

into adjustment was made to operate an idler pulley

for tightening the axle-belt. When the motor was

started, the armature was brought up to full revolution

and then the belt was tightened on the car-

axle, compelling motion of the locomotive. But the

belts were liable to slip a great deal in the process,

and the chafing of the belts charred them badly. If

that did not happen, and if the belt was made taut

suddenly, the armature burned out--which it did

with disconcerting frequency. The next step was to

use a number of resistance-boxes in series with the

armature, so that the locomotive could start with those

in circuit, and then the motorman could bring it up

to speed gradually by cutting one box out after the

other. To stop the locomotive, the armature circuit

was opened by the main switch, stopping the flow of

current, and then brakes were applied by long levers.

Matters generally and the motors in particular went

much better, even if the locomotive was so freely

festooned with resistance-boxes all of perceptible

weight and occupying much of the limited space.

These details show forcibly and typically the painful

steps of advance that every inventor in this new

field had to make in the effort to reach not alone

commercial practicability, but mechanical feasibility.

It was all empirical enough; but that was the only

way open even to the highest talent.



Smugglers landing laces and silks have been known

to wind them around their bodies, as being less

ostentatious than carrying them in a trunk. Edison

thought his resistance-boxes an equally superfluous

display, and therefore ingeniously wound some copper

resistance wire around one of the legs of the motor

field magnet, where it was out of the way, served as

a useful extra field coil in starting up the motor, and

dismissed most of the boxes back to the laboratory;



a few being retained under the seat for chance emergencies.

Like the boxes, this coil was in series with

the armature, and subject to plugging in and out at

will by the motorman. Thus equipped, the locomotive

was found quite satisfactory, and long did yeoman

service. It was given three cars to pull, one an

open awning-car with two park benches placed back to

back; one a flat freight-car, and one box-car dubbed

the "Pullman," with which Edison illustrated a system

of electric braking. Although work had been

begun so early in the year, and the road had been

operating since May, it was not until July that Edison

executed any application for patents on his

"electromagnetic railway engine," or his ingenious braking

system. Every inventor knows how largely his fate

lies in the hands of a competent and alert patent

attorney, in both the preparation and the prosecution

of his case; and Mr. Sprague is justified in observing

in his Century article: ""The paucity of controlling

claims obtained in these early patents is remarkable."

It is notorious that Edison did not then enjoy the

skilful aid in safeguarding his ideas that he commanded

later.



The daily newspapers and technical journals lost

no time in bringing the road to public attention, and

the New York Herald of June 25th was swift to suggest

that here was the locomotive that would be

"most pleasing to the average New Yorker, whose

head has ached with noise, whose eyes have been

filled with dust, or whose clothes have been ruined

with oil." A couple of days later, the Daily Graphic

illustrated and described the road and published a

sketch of a one-hundred-horse-power electric locomotive

for the use of the Pennsylvania Railroad between

Perth Amboy and Rahway. Visitors, of

course, were numerous, including many curious,

sceptical railroad managers, few if any of whom except

Villard could see the slightest use for the new

motive power. There is, perhaps, some excuse for

such indifference. No men in the world have more

new inventions brought to them than railroad managers,

and this was the rankest kind of novelty. It

was not, indeed, until a year later, in May, 1881, that

the first regular road collecting fares was put in

operation--a little stretch of one and a half miles

from Berlin to Lichterfelde, with one miniature motorcar.

Edison was in reality doing some heavy electric-

railway engineering, his apparatus full of ideas,

suggestions, prophecies; but to the operators of long

trunk lines it must have seemed utterly insignificant

and "excellent fooling."



Speaking of this situation, Mr. Edison says: "One

day Frank Thomson, the President of the Pennsylvania

Railroad, came out to see the electric light and

the electric railway in operation. The latter was then

about a mile long. He rode on it. At that time I

was getting out plans to make an electric locomotive

of three hundred horse-power with six-foot drivers,

with the idea of showing people that they could

dispense with their steam locomotives. Mr. Thomson

made the objection that it was impracticable, and

that it would be impossible to supplant steam. His

great experience and standing threw a wet blanket

on my hopes. But I thought he might perhaps be

mistaken, as there had been many such instances

on record. I continued to work on the plans, and

about three years later I started to build the locomotive

at the works at Goerck Street, and had it about

finished when I was switched off on some other work.

One of the reasons why I felt the electric railway to

be eminently practical was that Henry Villard, the

President of the Northern Pacific, said that one of

the greatest things that could be done would be to

build right-angle feeders into the wheat-fields of

Dakota and bring in the wheat to the main lines,

as the farmers then had to draw it from forty to

eighty miles. There was a point where it would not

pay to raise it at all; and large areas of the country

were thus of no value. I conceived the idea of building

a very light railroad of narrow gauge, and had

got all the data as to the winds on the plains, and

found that it would be possible with very large windmills

to supply enough power to drive those wheat

trains."



Among others who visited the little road at this

juncture were persons interested in the Manhattan

Elevated system of New York, on which experiments

were repeatedly tried later, but which was not destined

to adopt a method so obviously well suited to

all the conditions until after many successful

demonstrations had been made on elevated roads elsewhere.

It must be admitted that Mr. Edison was not very

profoundly impressed with the desire entertained in

that quarter to utilize any improvement, for he

remarks: "When the Elevated Railroad in New York,

up Sixth Avenue, was started there was a great

clamor about the noise, and injunctions were threatened.

The management engaged me to make a report

on the cause of the noise. I constructed an

instrument that would record the sound, and set out

to make a preliminary report, but I found that they

never intended to do anything but let the people

complain."



It was upon the co-operation of Villard that Edison

fell back, and an agreement was entered into between

them on September 14, 1881, which provided that the

latter would "build two and a half miles of electric

railway at Menlo Park, equipped with three cars,

two locomotives, one for freight, and one for

passengers, capacity of latter sixty miles an hour.

Capacity freight engine, ten tons net freight; cost

of handling a ton of freight per mile per horse-power

to be less than ordinary locomotive.... If experiments

are successful, Villard to pay actual outlay in

experiments, and to treat with the Light Company

for the installation of at least fifty miles of electric

railroad in the wheat regions." Mr. Edison is authority

for the statement that Mr. Villard advanced between

$35,000 and $40,000, and that the work done

was very satisfactory; but it did not end at that

time in any practical results, as the Northern Pacific

went into the hands of a receiver, and Mr. Villard's

ability to help was hopelessly crippled. The directors

of the Edison Electric Light Company could not be

induced to have anything to do with the electric

railway, and Mr. Insull states that the money advanced

was treated by Mr. Edison as a personal loan and repaid

to Mr. Villard, for whom he had a high admiration

and a strong feeling of attachment. Mr. Insull says:

"Among the financial men whose close personal

friendship Edison enjoyed, I would mention Henry

Villard, who, I think, had a higher appreciation of

the possibilities of the Edison system than probably

any other man of his time in Wall Street. He dropped

out of the business at the time of the consolidation

of the Thomson-Houston Company with the Edison

General Electric Company; but from the earliest days

of the business, when it was in its experimental period,

when the Edison light and power system was but an

idea, down to the day of his death, Henry Villard continued

a strong supporter not only with his influence,

but with his money. He was the first capitalist to

back individually Edison's experiments in electric

railways."



In speaking of his relationships with Mr. Villard at

this time, Edison says: "When Villard was all broken

down, and in a stupor caused by his disasters in

connection with the Northern Pacific, Mrs. Villard sent

for me to come and cheer him up. It was very difficult

to rouse him from his despair and apathy, but

I talked about the electric light to him, and its

development, and told him that it would help him win

it all back and put him in his former position. Villard

made his great rally; he made money out of the electric

light; and he got back control of the Northern

Pacific. Under no circumstances can a hustler be

kept down. If he is only square, he is bound to get

back on his feet. Villard has often been blamed and

severely criticised, but he was not the only one to

blame. His engineers had spent $20,000,000 too

much in building the road, and it was not his fault

if he found himself short of money, and at that time

unable to raise any more."



Villard maintained his intelligent interest in electric-

railway development, with regard to which Edison

remarks: "At one time Mr. Villard got the idea that

he would run the mountain division of the Northern

Pacific Railroad by electricity. He asked me if it

could be done. I said: `Certainly, it is too easy for

me to undertake; let some one else do it.' He said:

`I want you to tackle the problem,' and he insisted

on it. So I got up a scheme of a third rail and shoe

and erected it in my yard here in Orange. When I

got it all ready, he had all his division engineers come

on to New York, and they came over here. I showed

them my plans, and the unanimous decision of the

engineers was that it was absolutely and utterly

impracticable. That system is on the New York Central

now, and was also used on the New Haven road in its

first work with electricity."



At this point it may be well to cite some other

statements of Edison as to kindred work, with which

he has not usually been associated in the public mind.

"In the same manner I had worked out for the Manhattan

Elevated Railroad a system of electric trains,

and had the control of each car centred at one place

--multiple control. This was afterward worked out

and made practical by Frank Sprague. I got up a

slot contact for street railways, and have a patent on

it--a sliding contact in a slot. Edward Lauterbach

was connected with the Third Avenue Railroad in

New York--as counsel--and I told him he was mak-

ing a horrible mistake putting in the cable. I told

him to let the cable stand still and send electricity

through it, and he would not have to move hundreds

of tons of metal all the time. He would rue the day

when he put the cable in." It cannot be denied that

the prophecy was fulfilled, for the cable was the beginning

of the frightful financial collapse of the system,

and was torn out in a few years to make way for the

triumphant "trolley in the slot."



Incidental glimpses of this work are both amusing

and interesting. Hughes, who was working on the

experimental road with Mr. Edison, tells the following

story: "Villard sent J. C. Henderson, one of his

mechanical engineers, to see the road when it was in

operation, and we went down one day--Edison,

Henderson, and I--and went on the locomotive. Edison

ran it, and just after we started there was a

trestle sixty feet long and seven feet deep, and Edison

put on all the power. When we went over it we must

have been going forty miles an hour, and I could see

the perspiration come out on Henderson. After we

got over the trestle and started on down the track,

Henderson said: `When we go back I will walk. If

there is any more of that kind of running I won't be

in it myself.' " To the correspondence of Grosvenor

P. Lowrey we are indebted for a similar reminiscence,

under date of June 5, 1880: "Goddard and I have

spent a part of the day at Menlo, and all is glorious.

I have ridden at forty miles an hour on Mr. Edison's

electric railway--and we ran off the track. I protested

at the rate of speed over the sharp curves,

designed to show the power of the engine, but Edison

said they had done it often. Finally, when the last

trip was to be taken, I said I did not like it, but would

go along. The train jumped the track on a short

curve, throwing Kruesi, who was driving the engine,

with his face down in the dirt, and another man in a

comical somersault through some underbrush. Edison

was off in a minute, jumping and laughing, and

declaring it a most beautiful accident. Kruesi got

up, his face bleeding and a good deal shaken; and I

shall never forget the expression of voice and face

in which he said, with some foreign accent: `Oh!

yes, pairfeckly safe.' Fortunately no other hurts

were suffered, and in a few minutes we had the train

on the track and running again."



All this rough-and-ready dealing with grades and

curves was not mere horse-play, but had a serious purpose

underlying it, every trip having its record as to

some feature of defect or improvement. One particular

set of experiments relating to such work was

made on behalf of visitors from South America, and

were doubtless the first tests of the kind made for

that continent, where now many fine electric street

and interurban railway systems are in operation.

Mr. Edison himself supplies the following data:

"During the electric-railway experiments at Menlo

Park, we had a short spur of track up one of the

steep gullies. The experiment came about in this

way. Bogota, the capital of Columbia, is reached

on muleback--or was--from Honda on the headwaters

of the Magdalena River. There were parties

who wanted to know if transportation over the mule

route could not be done by electricity. They said the

grades were excessive, and it would cost too much to

do it with steam locomotives, even if they could

climb the grades. I said: `Well, it can't be much

more than 45 per cent.; we will try that first. If it

will do that it will do anything else.' I started at

45 per cent. I got up an electric locomotive with a

grip on the rail by which it went up the 45 per cent.

grade. Then they said the curves were very short.

I put the curves in. We started the locomotive with

nobody on it, and got up to twenty miles an hour,

taking those curves of very short radius; but it was

weeks before we could prevent it from running off.

We had to bank the tracks up to an angle of thirty

degrees before we could turn the curve and stay on.

These Spanish parties were perfectly satisfied we could

put in an electric railway from Honda to Bogota

successfully, and then they disappeared. I have never

seen them since. As usual, I paid for the experiment."



In the spring of 1883 the Electric Railway Company

of America was incorporated in the State of

New York with a capital of $2,000,000 to develop

the patents and inventions of Edison and Stephen

D. Field, to the latter of whom the practical work of

active development was confided, and in June of the

same year an exhibit was made at the Chicago Railway

Exposition, which attracted attention throughout

the country, and did much to stimulate the growing

interest in electric-railway work. With the aid

of Messrs. F. B. Rae, C. L. Healy, and C. O. Mailloux

a track and locomotive were constructed for the company

by Mr. Field and put in service in the gallery

of the main exhibition building. The track curved

sharply at either end on a radius of fifty-six feet, and

the length was about one-third of a mile. The locomotive

named "The Judge," after Justice Field, an

uncle of Stephen D. Field, took current from a central

rail between the two outer rails, that were the return

circuit, the contact being a rubbing wire brush on

each side of the "third rail," answering the same purpose

as the contact shoe of later date. The locomotive

weighed three tons, was twelve feet long, five

feet wide, and made a speed of nine miles an hour

with a trailer car for passengers. Starting on June

5th, when the exhibition closed on June 23d this tiny

but typical road had operated for over 118 hours, had

made over 446 miles, and had carried 26,805 passengers.

After the exposition closed the outfit was

taken during the same year to the exposition at

Louisville, Kentucky, where it was also successful,

carrying a large number of passengers. It deserves

note that at Chicago regular railway tickets were

issued to paying passengers, the first ever employed

on American electric railways.



With this modest but brilliant demonstration, to

which the illustrious names of Edison and Field were

attached, began the outburst of excitement over

electric railways, very much like the eras of speculation

and exploitation that attended only a few years

earlier the introduction of the telephone and the

electric light, but with such significant results that

the capitalization of electric roads in America is now

over $4,000,000,000, or twice as much as that of the

other two arts combined. There was a tremendous

rush into the electric-railway field after 1883, and an

outburst of inventive activity that has rarely, if ever,

been equalled. It is remarkable that, except Siemens,

no European achieved fame in this early work, while

from America the ideas and appliances of Edison,

Van Depoele, Sprague, Field, Daft, and Short have

been carried and adopted all over the world.



Mr. Edison was consulting electrician for the

Electric Railway Company, but neither a director

nor an executive officer. Just what the trouble was

as to the internal management of the corporation it

is hard to determine a quarter of a century later; but

it was equipped with all essential elements to dominate

an art in which after its first efforts it remained

practically supine and useless, while other interests

forged ahead and reaped both the profit and the glory.

Dissensions arose between the representatives of the

Field and Edison interests, and in April, 1890, the

Railway Company assigned its rights to the Edison

patents to the Edison General Electric Company,

recently formed by the consolidation of all the

branches of the Edison light, power, and manufacturing

industry under one management. The only

patent rights remaining to the Railway Company

were those under three Field patents, one of which,

with controlling claims, was put in suit June, 1890,

against the Jamaica & Brooklyn Road Company, a

customer of the Edison General Electric Company.

This was, to say the least, a curious and anomalous

situation. Voluminous records were made by both

parties to the suit, and in the spring of 1894 the case

was argued before the late Judge Townsend, who wrote

a long opinion dismissing the bill of complaint.[15] The

student will find therein a very complete and careful

study of the early electric-railway art. After this

decision was rendered, the Electric Railway Company

remained for several years in a moribund condition,

and on the last day of 1896 its property was placed

in the hands of a receiver. In February of 1897 the

receiver sold the three Field patents to their original

owner, and he in turn sold them to the Westinghouse

Electric and Manufacturing Company. The Railway

Company then went into voluntary dissolution, a sad

example of failure to seize the opportunity at the

psychological moment, and on the part of the inventor

to secure any adequate return for years of

effort and struggle in founding one of the great arts.

Neither of these men was squelched by such a calamitous

result, but if there were not something of bitterness

in their feelings as they survey what has come

of their work, they would not be human.



As a matter of fact, Edison retained a very lively

interest in electric-railway progress long after the

pregnant days at Menlo Park, one of the best evidences

of which is an article in the New York Electrical

Engineer of November 18, 1891, which describes

some important and original experiments in the direction

of adapting electrical conditions to the larger

cities. The overhead trolley had by that time begun

its victorious career, but there was intense hostility

displayed toward it in many places because of the

inevitable increase in the number of overhead wires,

which, carrying, as they did, a current of high voltage

and large quantity, were regarded as a menace to life

and property. Edison has always manifested a

strong objection to overhead wires in cities, and

urged placing them underground; and the outcry

against the overhead "deadly" trolley met with his

instant sympathy. His study of the problem brought

him to the development of the modern "substation,"

although the twists that later evolutions have given

the idea have left it scarcely recognizable.





[15] See 61 Fed. Rep. 655.





Mr. Villard, as President of the Edison General

Electric Company, requested Mr. Edison, as electrician

of the company, to devise a street-railway

system which should be applicable to the largest

cities where the use of the trolley would not be

permitted, where the slot conduit system would not be

used, and where, in general, the details of construction

should be reduced to the simplest form. The

limits imposed practically were such as to require that

the system should not cost more than a cable road to

install. Edison reverted to his ingenious lighting plan

of years earlier, and thus settled on a method by

which current should be conveyed from the power

plant at high potential to motor-generators placed

below the ground in close proximity to the rails.

These substations would convert the current received

at a pressure of, say, one thousand volts to one of

twenty volts available between rail and rail, with a

corresponding increase in the volume of the current.

With the utilization of heavy currents at low voltage

it became necessary, of course, to devise apparatus

which should be able to pick up with absolute certainty

one thousand amperes of current at this press-

ure through two inches of mud, if necessary. With

his wonted activity and fertility Edison set about

devising such a contact, and experimented with metal

wheels under all conditions of speed and track conditions.

It was several months before he could convey

one hundred amperes by means of such contacts,

but he worked out at last a satisfactory device which

was equal to the task. The next point was to secure a

joint between contiguous rails such as would permit of

the passage of several thousand amperes without

introducing undue resistance. This was also accomplished.



Objections were naturally made to rails out in the

open on the street surface carrying large currents at

a potential of twenty volts. It was said that vehicles

with iron wheels passing over the tracks and spanning

the two rails would short-circuit the current,

"chew" themselves up, and destroy the dynamos

generating the current by choking all that tremendous

amount of energy back into them. Edison tackled

the objection squarely and short-circuited his track

with such a vehicle, but succeeded in getting only

about two hundred amperes through the wheels, the

low voltage and the insulating properties of the axle-

grease being sufficient to account for such a result.

An iron bar was also used, polished, and with a man

standing on it to insure solid contact; but only one

thousand amperes passed through it--i.e., the amount

required by a single car, and, of course, much less than

the capacity of the generators able to operate a

system of several hundred cars.



Further interesting experiments showed that the

expected large leakage of current from the rails in

wet weather did not materialize. Edison found that

under the worst conditions with a wet and salted

track, at a potential difference of twenty volts

between the two rails, the extreme loss was only two

and one-half horse-power. In this respect the

phenomenon followed the same rule as that to which

telegraph wires are subject--namely, that the loss of

insulation is greater in damp, murky weather when

the insulators are covered with wet dust than during

heavy rains when the insulators are thoroughly

washed by the action of the water. In like manner

a heavy rain-storm cleaned the tracks from the

accumulations due chiefly to the droppings of the horses,

which otherwise served largely to increase the conductivity.

Of course, in dry weather the loss of current

was practically nothing, and, under ordinary

conditions, Edison held, his system was in respect to

leakage and the problems of electrolytic attack of

the current on adjacent pipes, etc., as fully insulated

as the standard trolley network of the day. The cost

of his system Mr. Edison placed at from $30,000 to

$100,000 per mile of double track, in accordance with

local conditions, and in this respect comparing very

favorably with the cable systems then so much in

favor for heavy traffic. All the arguments that could

be urged in support of this ingenious system are

tenable and logical at the present moment; but the

trolley had its way except on a few lines where the

conduit-and-shoe method was adopted; and in the

intervening years the volume of traffic created and

handled by electricity in centres of dense population

has brought into existence the modern subway.



But down to the moment of the preparation of this

biography, Edison has retained an active interest in

transportation problems, and his latest work has

been that of reviving the use of the storage battery

for street-car purposes. At one time there were a

number of storage-battery lines and cars in operation

in such cities as Washington, New York, Chicago,

and Boston; but the costs of operation and maintenance

were found to be inordinately high as compared

with those of the direct-supply methods, and the battery

cars all disappeared. The need for them under

many conditions remained, as, for example, in places

in Greater New York where the overhead trolley wires

are forbidden as objectionable, and where the ground

is too wet or too often submerged to permit of the

conduit with the slot. Some of the roads in Greater

New York have been anxious to secure such cars, and,

as usual, the most resourceful electrical engineer and

inventor of his times has made the effort. A special

experimental track has been laid at the Orange

laboratory, and a car equipped with the Edison storage

battery and other devices has been put under

severe and extended trial there and in New York.



Menlo Park, in ruin and decay, affords no traces of

the early Edison electric-railway work, but the crude

little locomotive built by Charles T. Hughes was rescued

from destruction, and has become the property of the

Pratt Institute, of Brooklyn, towhose thousands of

technical students it is a constant example and incentive.

It was loaned in 1904 to the Association of Edison

Illuminating Companies, and by it exhibited as part of the

historical Edison collection at the St. Louis Exposition.

