





CHAPTER XXVII



THE VALUE OF EDISON'S INVENTIONS TO

THE WORLD



IF the world were to take an account of stock, so

to speak, and proceed in orderly fashion to marshal

its tangible assets in relation to dollars and

cents, the natural resources of our globe, from centre

to circumference, would head the list. Next would

come inventors, whose value to the world as an asset

could be readily estimated from an increase of its

wealth resulting from the actual transformations of

these resources into items of convenience and comfort

through the exercise of their inventive ingenuity.



Inventors of practical devices may be broadly divided

into two classes--first, those who may be said

to have made two blades of grass grow where only

one grew before; and, second, great inventors, who

have made grass grow plentifully on hitherto unproductive

ground. The vast majority of practical inventors

belong to and remain in the first of these

divisions, but there have been, and probably always

will be, a less number who, by reason of their greater

achievements, are entitled to be included in both

classes. Of these latter, Thomas Alva Edison is one,

but in the pages of history he stands conspicuously

pre-eminent--a commanding towering figure, even

among giants.



The activities of Edison have been of such great

range, and his conquests in the domains of practical

arts so extensive and varied, that it is somewhat

difficult to estimate with any satisfactory degree of

accuracy the money value of his inventions to the

world of to-day, even after making due allowance

for the work of other great inventors and the propulsive

effect of large amounts of capital thrown into

the enterprises which took root, wholly or in part,

through the productions of his genius and energies.

This difficulty will be apparent, for instance, when we

consider his telegraph and telephone inventions.

These were absorbed in enterprises already existing,

and were the means of assisting their rapid growth

and expansion, particularly the telephone industry.

Again, in considering the fact that Edison was one

of the first in the field to design and perfect a practical

and operative electric railway, the main features

of which are used in all electric roads of to-day, we are

confronted with the problem as to what proportion of

their colossal investment and earnings should be

ascribed to him.



Difficulties are multiplied when we pause for a

moment to think of Edison's influence on collateral

branches of business. In the public mind he is

credited with the invention of the incandescent electric

light, the phonograph, and other widely known

devices; but how few realize his actual influence on

other trades that are not generally thought of in connection

with these things. For instance, let us note

what a prominent engine builder, the late Gardiner

C. Sims, has said: "Watt, Corliss, and Porter brought

forward steam-engines to a high state of proficiency,

yet it remained for Mr. Edison to force better proportions,

workmanship, designs, use of metals, regulation,

the solving of the complex problems of high

speed and endurance, and the successful development

of the shaft governor. Mr. Edison is pre-

eminent in the realm of engineering."



The phenomenal growth of the copper industry was

due to a rapid and ever-increasing demand, owing to

the exploitation of the telephone, electric light, electric

motor, and electric railway industries. Without

these there might never have been the romance of

"Coppers" and the rise and fall of countless fortunes.

And although one cannot estimate in definite figures

the extent of Edison's influence in the enormous increase

of copper production, it is to be remembered

that his basic inventions constitute a most important

factor in the demand for the metal. Besides, one

must also give him the credit, as already noted, for

having recognized the necessity for a pure quality of

copper for electric conductors, and for his persistence

in having compelled the manufacturers of that period

to introduce new and additional methods of refinement

so as to bring about that result, which is now

a sine qua non.



Still considering his influence on other staples and

collateral trades, let us enumerate briefly and in a

general manner some of the more important and additional

ones that have been not merely stimulated,

but in many cases the business and sales have been

directly increased and new arts established through

the inventions of this one man--namely, iron, steel,

brass, zinc, nickel, platinum ($5 per ounce in 1878,

now $26 an ounce), rubber, oils, wax, bitumen, various

chemical compounds, belting, boilers, injectors, structural

steel, iron tubing, glass, silk, cotton, porcelain,

fine woods, slate, marble, electrical measuring instruments,

miscellaneous machinery, coal, wire, paper,

building materials, sapphires, and many others.



The question before us is, To what extent has

Edison added to the wealth of the world by his

inventions and his energy and perseverance? It will

be noted from the foregoing that no categorical answer

can be offered to such a question, but sufficient material

can be gathered from a statistical review of the

commercial arts directly influenced to afford an

approximate idea of the increase in national wealth that

has been affected by or has come into being through

the practical application of his ideas.



First of all, as to inventions capable of fairly definite

estimate, let us mention the incandescent electric

light and systems of distribution of electric light,

heat, and power, which may justly be considered as

the crowning inventions of Edison's life. Until October

21, 1879, there was nothing in existence resembling

our modern incandescent lamp. On that date,

as we have seen in a previous chapter, Edison's labors

culminated in his invention of a practical incandescent

electric lamp embodying absolutely all the essentials

of the lamp of to-day, thus opening to the

world the doors of a new art and industry. To-day

there are in the United States more than 41,000,000

of these lamps, connected to existing central-station

circuits in active operation.



Such circuits necessarily imply the existence of

central stations with their equipment. Until the

beginning of 1882 there were only a few arc-lighting

stations in existence for the limited distribution of

current. At the present time there are over 6000

central stations in this country for the distribution

of electric current for light, heat, and power, with

capital obligations amounting to not less than

$1,000,000,000. Besides the above-named 41,000,000

incandescent lamps connected to their mains, there are

about 500,000 arc lamps and 150,000 motors, using

750,000 horse-power, besides countless fan motors

and electric heating and cooking appliances.



When it is stated that the gross earnings of these

central stations approximate the sum of $225,000,000

yearly, the significant import of these statistics of

an art that came so largely from Edison's laboratory

about thirty years ago will undoubtedly be apparent.



But the above are not by any means all the facts

relating to incandescent electric lighting in the United

States, for in addition to central stations there are

upward of 100,000 isolated or private plants in mills,

factories, steamships, hotels, theatres, etc., owned by

the persons or concerns who operate them. These

plants represent an approximate investment of

$500,000,000, and the connection of not less than

25,000,000 incandescent lamps or their equivalent.



Then there are the factories where these incandescent

lamps are made, about forty in number, repre-

sensing a total investment that may be approximated

at $25,000,000. It is true that many of these factories

are operated by other than the interests which

came into control of the Edison patents (General

Electric Company), but the 150,000,000 incandescent

electric lamps now annually made are broadly covered

in principle by Edison's fundamental ideas and

patents.



It will be noted that these figures are all in round

numbers, but they are believed to be well within the

mark, being primarily founded upon the special reports

of the Census Bureau issued in 1902 and 1907,

with the natural increase from that time computed

by experts who are in position to obtain the facts.

It would be manifestly impossible to give exact figures

of such a gigantic and swiftly moving industry,

whose totals increase from week to week.



The reader will naturally be disposed to ask whether

it is intended to claim that Edison has brought about

all this magnificent growth of the electric-lighting

art. The answer to this is decidedly in the negative,

for the fact is that he laid some of the foundation

and erected a building thereon, and in the natural

progressive order of things other inventors of more

or less fame have laid substructures or added a wing

here and a story there until the resultant great structure

has attained such proportions as to evoke the

admiration of the beholder; but the old foundation

and the fundamental building still remain to support

other parts. In other words, Edison created the

incandescent electric lamp, and invented certain

broad and fundamental systems of distribution of

current, with all the essential devices of detail necessary

for successful operation. These formed a foundation.

He also spent great sums of money and devoted

several years of patient labor in the early

practical exploitation of the dynamo and central

station and isolated plants, often under, adverse and

depressing circumstances, with a dogged determination

that outlived an opposition steadily threatening

defeat. These efforts resulted in the firm commercial

establishment of modern electric lighting. It is true

that many important inventions of others have a

distinguished place in the art as it is exploited today,

but the fact remains that the broad essentials,

such as the incandescent lamp, systems of distribution,

and some important details, are not only universally

used, but are as necessary to-day for successful

commercial practice as they were when Edison

invented them many years ago.



The electric railway next claims our consideration,

but we are immediately confronted by a difficulty

which seems insurmountable when we attempt to

formulate any definite estimate of the value and

influence of Edison's pioneer work and inventions.

There is one incontrovertible fact--namely, that he

was the first man to devise, construct, and operate

from a central station a practicable, life-size electric

railroad, which was capable of transporting and did

transport passengers and freight at variable speeds

over varying grades, and under complete control

of the operator. These are the essential elements

in all electric railroading of the present day; but

while Edison's original broad ideas are embodied

in present practice, the perfection of the modern electric

railway is greatly due to the labors and inventions

of a large number of other well-known inventors.

There was no reason why Edison could not have continued

the commercial development of the electric

railway after he had helped to show its practicability

in 1880, 1881, and 1882, just as he had completed his

lighting system, had it not been that his financial

allies of the period lacked faith in the possibilities of

electric railroads, and therefore declined to furnish

the money necessary for the purpose of carrying on

the work.



With these facts in mind, we shall ask the reader

to assign to Edison a due proportion of credit for his

pioneer and basic work in relation to the prodigious

development of electric railroading that has since

taken place. The statistics of 1908 for American

street and elevated railways show that within twenty-

five years the electric-railway industry has grown to

embrace 38,812 miles of track on streets and for

elevated railways, operated under the ownership of

1238 separate companies, whose total capitalization

amounted to the enormous sum of $4,123,834,598. In

the equipments owned by such companies there are

included 68,636 electric cars and 17,568 trailers and

others, making a total of 86,204 of such vehicles.

These cars and equipments earned over $425,000,000

in 1907, in giving the public transportation, at a cost,

including transfers, of a little over three cents per

passenger, for whom a fifteen-mile ride would be

possible. It is the cheapest transportation in the

world.



Some mention should also be made of the great

electrical works of the country, in which the dynamos,

motors, and other varied paraphernalia are made for

electric lighting, electric railway, and other purposes.

The largest of these works is undoubtedly that of the

General Electric Company at Schenectady, New York,

a continuation and enormous enlargement of the

shops which Edison established there in 1886. This

plant at the present time embraces over 275 acres,

of which sixty acres are covered by fifty large and

over one hundred small buildings; besides which the

company also owns other large plants elsewhere,

representing a total investment approximating the sum

of $34,850,000 up to 1908. The productions of the

General Electric Company alone average annual sales

of nearly $75,000,000, but they do not comprise

the total of the country's manufactures in these

lines.



Turning our attention now to the telephone, we

again meet a condition that calls for thoughtful

consideration before we can properly appreciate how

much the growth of this industry owes to Edison's

inventive genius. In another place there has already

been told the story of the telephone, from which we

have seen that to Alexander Graham Bell is due the

broad idea of transmission of speech by means of an

electrical circuit; also that he invented appropriate

instruments and devices through which he accomplished

this result, although not to that extent which

gave promise of any great commercial practicability

for the telephone as it then existed. While the art

was in this inefficient condition, Edison went to work

on the subject, and in due time, as we have already

learned, invented and brought out the carbon transmitter,

which is universally acknowledged to have

been the needed device that gave to the telephone

the element of commercial practicability, and has

since led to its phenomenally rapid adoption and

world-wide use. It matters not that others were

working in the same direction, Edison was legally

adjudicated to have been the first to succeed in point

of time, and his inventions were put into actual use,

and may be found in principle in every one of the

7,000,000 telephones which are estimated to be employed

in the country at the present day. Basing

the statements upon facts shown by the Census reports

of 1902 and 1907, and adding thereto the growth

of the industry since that time, we find on a conservative

estimate that at this writing the investment has

been not less than $800,000,000 in now existing telephone

systems, while no fewer than 10,500,000,000

talks went over the lines during the year 1908. These

figures relate only to telephone systems, and do not

include any details regarding the great manufacturing

establishments engaged in the construction of

telephone apparatus, of which there is a production

amounting to at least $15,000,000 per annum.



Leaving the telephone, let us now turn our attention

to the telegraph, and endeavor to show as best we can

some idea of the measure to which it has been affected

by Edison's inventions. Although, as we have seen

in a previous part of this book, his earliest fame arose

from his great practical work in telegraphic inventions

and improvements, there is no way in which any

definite computation can be made of the value of his

contributions in the art except, perhaps, in the case

of his quadruplex, through which alone it is estimated

that there has been saved from $15,000,000 to $20,000,000

in the cost of line construction in this country.

If this were the only thing that he had ever accomplished,

it would entitle him to consideration as an

inventor of note. The quadruplex, however, has

other material advantages, but how far they and the

natural growth of the business have contributed to

the investment and earnings of the telegraph companies,

is beyond practicable computation.



It would, perhaps, be interesting to speculate upon

what might have been the growth of the telegraph

and the resultant benefit to the community had

Edison's automatic telegraph inventions been allowed

to take their legitimate place in the art, but we shall

not allow ourselves to indulge in flights of fancy, as

the value of this chapter rests not upon conjecture,

but only upon actual fact. Nor shall we attempt

to offer any statistics regarding Edison's numerous

inventions relating to telegraphs and kindred devices,

such as stock tickers, relays, magnets, rheotomes,

repeaters, printing telegraphs, messenger calls, etc.,

on which he was so busily occupied as an inventor

and manufacturer during the ten years that

began with January, 1869. The principles of many

of these devices are still used in the arts, but have

become so incorporated in other devices as to be

inseparable, and cannot now be dealt with

separately. To show what they mean, however, it

might be noted that New York City alone has 3000

stock "tickers," consuming 50,000 miles of record

tape every year.



Turning now to other important arts and industries

which have been created by Edison's inventions, and

in which he is at this time taking an active personal

interest, let us visit Orange, New Jersey. When his

present laboratory was nearing completion in 1887, he

wrote to Mr. J. Hood Wright, a partner in the firm of

Drexel, Morgan & Co.: "My ambition is to build up a

great industrial works in the Orange Valley, starting

in a small way and gradually working up."



In this plant, which represents an investment

approximating the sum of $4,000,000, are grouped a

number of industrial enterprises of which Edison is

either the sole or controlling owner and the guiding

spirit. These enterprises are the National Phonograph

Company, the Edison Business Phonograph

Company, the Edison Phonograph Works, the Edison

Manufacturing Company, the Edison Storage Battery

Company, and the Bates Manufacturing Company.

The importance of these industries will be apparent

when it is stated that at this plant the maximum

pay-roll shows the employment of over 4200

persons, with annual earnings in salaries and wages

of more than $2,750,000.



In considering the phonograph in its commercial

aspect, and endeavoring to arrive at some idea of the

world's estimate of the value of this invention, we

feel the ground more firm under our feet, for Edison

has in later years controlled its manufacture and sale.

It will be remembered that the phonograph lay dormant,

commercially speaking, for about ten years

after it came into being, and then later invention reduced

it to a device capable of more popular utility.

A few years of rather unsatisfactory commercial

experience brought about a reorganization, through

which Edison resumed possession of the business. It

has since been continued under his general direction

and ownership, and he has made a great many additional

inventions tending to improve the machine

in all its parts.



The uses made of the phonograph up to this time

have been of four kinds, generally speaking--first,

and principally, for amusement; second, for instruction

in languages; third, for business, in the dictation

of correspondence; and fourth, for sentimental reasons

in preserving the voices of friends. No separate

figures are available to show the extent of its

employment in the second and fourth classes, as they

are probably included in machines coming under the

first subdivision. Under this head we find that there

have been upward of 1,310,000 phonographs sold

during the last twenty years, with and for which there

have been made and sold no fewer than 97,845,000

records of a musical or other character. Phonographic

records are now being manufactured at

Orange at the rate of 75,000 a day, the annual sale

of phonographs and records being approximately

$7,000,000, including business phonographs. This

does not include blank records, of which large numbers

have also been supplied to the public.



The adoption of the business phonograph has not

been characterized by the unanimity that obtained

in the case of the one used merely for amusement, as

its use involves some changes in methods that business

men are slow to adopt until they realize the resulting

convenience and economy. Although it is

only a few years since the business phonograph has

begun to make some headway, it is not difficult to

appreciate that Edison's prediction in 1878 as to the

value of such an appliance is being realized, when

we find that up to this time the sales run up to 12,695

in number. At the present time the annual sales of

the business phonographs and supplies, cylinders, etc.,

are not less than $350,000.



We must not forget that the basic patent of Edison

on the phonograph has long since expired, thus throwing

open to the world the wonderful art of reproducing

human speech and other sounds. The world was

not slow to take advantage of the fact, hence there

are in the field numerous other concerns in the same

business. It is conservatively estimated by those

who know the trade and are in position to form

an opinion, that the figures above given represent

only about one-half of the entire business of the

country in phonographs, records, cylinders, and

supplies.



Taking next his inventions that pertain to a more

recently established but rapidly expanding branch

of business that provides for the amusement of the

public, popularly known as "motion pictures," we

also find a general recognition of value created. Referring

the reader to a previous chapter for a discussion

of Edison's standing as a pioneer inventor in

this art, let us glance at the commercial proportions

of this young but lusty business, whose ramifications

extend to all but the most remote and primitive hamlets

of our country.



The manufacture of the projecting machines and

accessories, together with the reproduction of films,

is carried on at the Orange Valley plant, and from the

inception of the motion-picture business to the present

time there have been made upward of 16,000

projecting machines and many million feet of films

carrying small photographs of moving objects. Although

the motion-picture business, as a commercial

enterprise, is still in its youth, it is of sufficient

moment to call for the annual production of thousands

of machines and many million feet of films in Edison's

shops, having a sale value of not less than $750,000.

To produce the originals from which these Edison

films are made, there have been established two

"studios," the largest of which is in the Bronx, New

York City.



In this, as well as in the phonograph business, there

are many other manufacturers in the field. Indeed,

the annual product of the Edison Manufacturing

Company in this line is only a fractional part of the

total that is absorbed by the 8000 or more motion-

picture theatres and exhibitions that are in operation

in the United States at the present time,

and which represent an investment of some $45,000,000.

Licensees under Edison patents in this

country alone produce upward of 60,000,000 feet of

films annually, containing more than a billion and

a half separate photographs. To what extent the

motion-picture business may grow in the not remote

future it is impossible to conjecture, for it has taken

a place in the front rank of rapidly increasing enterprises.



The manufacture and sale of the Edison-Lalande

primary battery, conducted by the Edison Manufacturing

Company at the Orange Valley plant, is a

business of no mean importance. Beginning about

twenty years ago with a battery that, without polarizing,

would furnish large currents specially adapted

for gas-engine ignition and other important purposes,

the business has steadily grown in magnitude until

the present output amounts to about 125,000 cells

annually; the total number of cells put into the

hands of the public up to date being approximately

1,500,000. It will be readily conceded that to most

men this alone would be an enterprise of a lifetime,

and sufficient in itself to satisfy a moderate ambition.

But, although it has yielded a considerable profit to

Edison and gives employment to many people, it is

only one of the many smaller enterprises that owe

an existence to his inventive ability and commercial

activity.



So it also is in regard to the mimeograph, whose

forerunner, the electric pen, was born of Edison's

brain in 1877. He had been long impressed by the

desirability of the rapid production of copies of written

documents, and, as we have seen by a previous

chapter, he invented the electric pen for this purpose,

only to improve upon it later with a more desirable

device which he called the mimeograph, that is in

use, in various forms, at this time. Although the

electric pen had a large sale and use in its time, the

statistics relating to it are not available. The mimeo-

graph, however, is, and has been for many years, a

standard office appliance, and is entitled to consideration,

as the total number put into use up to this

time is approximately 180,000, valued at $3,500,000,

while the annual output is in the neighborhood of

9000 machines, sold for about $150,000, besides the

vast quantity of special paper and supplies which its

use entails in the production of the many millions of

facsimile letters and documents. The extent of production

and sale of supplies for the mimeograph may

be appreciated when it is stated that they bring

annually an equivalent of three times the amount

realized from sales of machines. The manufacture

and sale of the mimeograph does not come within the

enterprises conducted under Edison's personal direction,

as he sold out the whole thing some years ago

to Mr. A. B. Dick, of Chicago.



In making a somewhat radical change of subject,

from duplicating machines to cement, we find ourselves

in a field in which Edison has made a most

decided impression. The reader has already learned

that his entry into this field was, in a manner,

accidental, although logically in line with pronounced

convictions of many years' standing, and following up

the fund of knowledge gained in the magnetic ore-milling

business. From being a new-comer in the cement

business, his corporation in five years has grown to be

the fifth largest producer in the United States, with

a still increasing capacity. From the inception of

this business there has been a steady and rapid

development, resulting in the production of a grand

total of over 7,300,000 barrels of cement up to the

present date, having a value of about $6,000,000,

exclusive of package. At the time of this writing,

the rate of production is over 8000 barrels of cement

per day, or, say, 2,500,000 barrels per year, having an

approximate selling value of a little less than $2,000,000,

with prospects of increasing in the near future

to a daily output of 10,000 barrels. This enterprise

is carried on by a corporation called the Edison

Portland Cement Company, in which he is very largely

interested, and of which he is the active head and

guiding spirit.



Had not Edison suspended the manufacture and

sale of his storage battery a few years ago because

he was not satisfied with it, there might have been

given here some noteworthy figures of an extensive

business, for the company's books show an astonishing

number of orders that were received during the time

of the shut-down. He was implored for batteries,

but in spite of the fact that good results had been

obtained from the 18,000 or 20,000 cells sold some

years ago, he adhered firmly to his determination to

perfect them to a still higher standard before resuming

and continuing their manufacture as a regular

commodity. As we have noted in a previous chapter,

however, deliveries of the perfected type were

begun in the summer of 1909, and since that time the

business has continued to grow in the measure indicated

by the earlier experience.



Thus far we have concerned ourselves chiefly with

those figures which exhibit the extent of investment

and production, but there is another and humanly

important side that presents itself for consideration

namely, the employment of a vast industrial army of

men and women, who earn a living through their

connection with some of the arts and industries to

which our narrative has direct reference. To this the

reader's attention will now be drawn.



The following figures are based upon the Special

Reports of the Census Bureau, 1902 and 1907, with

additions computed upon the increase that has subsequently

taken place. In the totals following is included

the compensation paid to salaried officials and

clerks. Details relating to telegraph systems are

omitted.



Taking the electric light into consideration first,

we find that in the central stations of the United

States there are not less than an average of 50,000

persons employed, requiring an aggregate yearly pay-

roll of over $40,000,000. This does not include the

100,000 or more isolated electric-light plants scattered

throughout the land. Many of these are quite large,

and at least one-third of them require one additional

helper, thus adding, say, 33,000 employees to the

number already mentioned. If we assume as low

a wage as $10 per week for each of these helpers, we

must add to the foregoing an additional sum of over

$17,000,000 paid annually for wages, almost entirely

in the isolated incandescent electric lighting field.



Central stations and isolated plants consume over

100,000,000 incandescent electric lamps annually, and

in the production of these there are engaged about

forty factories, on whose pay-rolls appear an average

of 14,000 employees, earning an aggregate yearly sum

of $8,000,000.



Following the incandescent lamp we must not forget

an industry exclusively arising from it and absolutely

dependent upon it--namely, that of making

fixtures for such lamps, the manufacture of which

gives employment to upward of 6000 persons, who

annually receive at least $3,750,000 in compensation.



The detail devices of the incandescent electric lighting

system also contribute a large quota to the country's

wealth in the millions of dollars paid out in

salaries and wages to many thousands of persons who

are engaged in their manufacture.



The electric railways of our country show even

larger figures than the lighting stations and plants,

as they employ on the average over 250,000 persons,

whose annual compensation amounts to not less than

$155,000,000.



In the manufacture of about $50,000,000 worth of

dynamos and motors annually, for central-station

equipment, isolated plants, electric railways, and

other purposes, the manufacturers of the country

employ an average of not less than 30,000 people,

whose yearly pay-roll amounts to no less a sum than

$20,000,000,



The growth of the telephone systems of the United

States also furnishes us with statistics of an analogous

nature, for we find that the average number of employees

engaged in this industry is at least 140,000,

whose annual earnings aggregate a minimum of

$75,000,000; besides which the manufacturers of

telephone apparatus employ over 12,000 persons, to

whom is paid annually about $5,500,000.



No attempt is made to include figures of collateral

industries, such, for instance, as copper, which is

very closely allied with the electrical arts, and the

great bulk of which is refined electrically.



The 8000 or so motion-picture theatres of the

country employ no fewer than 40,000 people, whose

aggregate annual income amounts to not less than

$37,000,000.



Coming now to the Orange Valley plant, we take a

drop from these figures to the comparatively modest

ones which give us an average of 3600 employees

and calling for an annual pay-roll of about $2,250,000.

It must be remembered, however, that the sums

mentioned above represent industries operated by

great aggregations of capital, while the Orange Valley

plant, as well as the Edison Portland Cement Company,

with an average daily number of 530 employees

and over $400,000 annual pay-roll, represent in a

large measure industries that are more in the nature

of closely held enterprises and practically under the

direction of one mind.



The table herewith given summarizes the figures

that have just been presented, and affords an idea of

the totals affected by the genius of this one man. It

is well known that many other men and many other

inventions have been needed for the perfection of

these arts; but it is equally true that, as already

noted, some of these industries are directly the creation

of Edison, while in every one of the rest his impress

has been deep and significant. Before he began

inventing, only two of them were known at all

as arts--telegraphy and the manufacture of cement.

Moreover, these figures deal only with the United

States, and take no account of the development of

many of the Edison inventions in Europe or of their

adoption throughout the world at large. Let it suffice





STATISTICAL RESUME (APPROXIMATE) OF SOME OF THE INDUSTRIES

IN THE UNITED STATES DIRECTLY FOUNDED UPON OR

AFFECTED BY INVENTIONS OF THOMAS A. EDISON



                                            Annual

                                          Gross Rev-     Number     Annual

Class of Industry           Investment     enue or      of Em-     Pay-Rolls

                                            sales

Central station lighting

 and power              $1,000,000,000    $125,000,000   50,000   $40,000,000

Isolated incandescent

 lighting                  500,000,000         --        33,000    17,000 000

Incandescent lamps          25,000,000      20,000,000   14,000     8,000 000

Electric fixtures            8,000,000       5,000,000    6,000     3,750,000

Dynamos and motors          60,000,000      50,000,000   30,000    20,000,000

Electric railways        4,000,000,000     430,000,000  250,000   155,000,000

Telephone systems          800,000,000     175,000,000  140,000    75,000,000

Telephone apparatus         30,000,000      15,000,000   12,000     5,500,000

Phonograph and motion 

 pictures                   10,000,000      15,000,000    5,000     6,000,000

Motion picture theatres     40,000,000      80,000,000   40,000    37,000,000

Edison Portland cement       4,000,000       2,000,000      530       400,000

Telegraphy                 250,000,000      60,000,000   100,000   30,000,000

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Totals                   6,727,000,000   1,077,000,000   680,530  397,650,000





that in America alone the work of Edison has been

one of the most potent factors in bringing into existence

new industries now capitalized at nearly $ 7,000,000,000,

earning annually over $1,000,000,000, and

giving employment to an army of more than six

hundred thousand people.



A single diamond, prismatically flashing from its

many facets the beauties of reflected light, comes

well within the limits of comprehension of the human

mind and appeals to appreciation by the finer sensibilities;

but in viewing an exhibition of thousands

of these beautiful gems, the eye and brain are simply

bewildered with the richness of a display which tends

to confuse the intellect until the function of analysis

comes into play and leads to more adequate apprehension.



So, in presenting the mass of statistics contained in

this chapter, we fear that the result may have been

the bewilderment of the reader to some extent.

Nevertheless, in writing a biography of Edison, the

main object is to present the facts as they are, and

leave it to the intelligent reader to classify, apply,

and analyze them in such manner as appeals most

forcibly to his intellectual processes. If in the

foregoing pages there has appeared to be a tendency to

attribute to Edison the entire credit for the growth

to which many of the above-named great enterprises

have in these latter days attained, we must especially

disclaim any intention of giving rise to such a

deduction. No one who has carefully followed the

course of this narrative can deny, however, that

Edison is the father of some of the arts and industries

that have been mentioned, and that as to some of the

others it was the magic of his touch that helped make

them practicable. Not only to his work and ingenuity

is due the present magnitude of these arts and industries,

but it is attributable also to the splendid work

and numerous contributions of other great inventors,

such as Brush, Bell, Elihu Thomson, Weston, Sprague,

and many others, as well as to the financiers and

investors who in the past thirty years have furnished

the vast sums of money that were necessary to exploit

and push forward these enterprises.



The reader may have noticed in a perusal of this

chapter the lack of autobiographical quotations, such

as have appeared in other parts of this narrative.

Edison's modesty has allowed us but one remark on

the subject. This was made by him to one of the

writers a short time ago, when, after an interesting

indulgence in reminiscences of old times and early

inventions, he leaned back in his chair, and with

a broad smile on his face, said, reflectively: "Say,

I HAVE been mixed up in a whole lot of things,

haven't I?"


