




CHAPTER XIII



A WORLD-HUNT FOR FILAMENT MATERIAL



IN writing about the old experimenting days at

Menlo Park, Mr. F. R. Upton says: "Edison's day

is twenty-four hours long, for he has always worked

whenever there was anything to do, whether day or

night, and carried a force of night workers, so that

his experiments could go on continually. If he wanted

material, he always made it a principle to have it at

once, and never hesitated to use special messengers

to get it. I remember in the early days of the electric

light he wanted a mercury pump for exhausting the

lamps. He sent me to Princeton to get it. I got

back to Metuchen late in the day, and had to carry

the pump over to the laboratory on my back that

evening, set it up, and work all night and the next

day getting results."



This characteristic principle of obtaining desired

material in the quickest and most positive way manifested

itself in the search that Edison instituted for

the best kind of bamboo for lamp filaments, immediately

after the discovery related in a preceding

chapter. It is doubtful whether, in the annals of

scientific research and experiment, there is anything

quite analogous to the story of this search and the

various expeditions that went out from the Edison

laboratory in 1880 and subsequent years, to scour

the earth for a material so apparently simple as a

homogeneous strip of bamboo, or other similar fibre.

Prolonged and exhaustive experiment, microscopic

examination, and an intimate knowledge of the

nature of wood and plant fibres, however, had led

Edison to the conclusion that bamboo or similar

fibrous filaments were more suitable than anything

else then known for commercial incandescent lamps,

and he wanted the most perfect for that purpose.

Hence, the quickest way was to search the tropics

until the proper material was found.



The first emissary chosen for this purpose was the

late William H. Moore, of Rahway, New Jersey, who

left New York in the summer of 1880, bound for

China and Japan, these being the countries pre-

eminently noted for the production of abundant

species of bamboo. On arrival in the East he quickly

left the cities behind and proceeded into the interior,

extending his search far into the more remote country

districts, collecting specimens on his way, and

devoting much time to the study of the bamboo, and

in roughly testing the relative value of its fibre in

canes of one, two, three, four, and five year growths.

Great bales of samples were sent to Edison, and after

careful tests a certain variety and growth of Japanese

bamboo was determined to be the most satisfactory

material for filaments that had been found. Mr.

Moore, who was continuing his searches in that

country, was instructed to arrange for the cultivation

and shipment of regular supplies of this particular

species. Arrangements to this end were accordingly

made with a Japanese farmer, who began to make

immediate shipments, and who subsequently displayed

so much ingenuity in fertilizing and cross-

fertilizing that the homogeneity of the product was

constantly improved. The use of this bamboo for

Edison lamp filaments was continued for many years.



Although Mr. Moore did not meet with the exciting

adventures of some subsequent explorers, he encountered

numerous difficulties and novel experiences

in his many months of travel through the hinterland

of Japan and China. The attitude toward foreigners

thirty years ago was not as friendly as it has

since become, but Edison, as usual, had made a

happy choice of messengers, as Mr. Moore's good

nature and diplomacy attested. These qualities,

together with his persistence and perseverance and

faculty of intelligent discrimination in the matter

of fibres, helped to make his mission successful, and

gave to him the honor of being the one who found

the bamboo which was adopted for use as filaments

in commercial Edison lamps.



Although Edison had satisfied himself that bamboo

furnished the most desirable material thus far

discovered for incandescent-lamp filaments, he felt

that in some part of the world there might be found

a natural product of the same general character that

would furnish a still more perfect and homogeneous

material. In his study of this subject, and during the

prosecution of vigorous and searching inquiries in

various directions, he learned that Mr. John C.

Brauner, then residing in Brooklyn, New York, had

an expert knowledge of indigenous plants of the

particular kind desired. During the course of a geological

survey which he had made for the Brazilian

Government, Mr. Brauner had examined closely the

various species of palms which grow plentifully in

that country, and of them there was one whose fibres

he thought would be just what Edison wanted.



Accordingly, Mr. Brauner was sent for and dispatched

to Brazil in December, 1880, to search for

and send samples of this and such other palms, fibres,

grasses, and canes as, in his judgment, would be suitable

for the experiments then being carried on at

Menlo Park. Landing at Para, he crossed over into

the Amazonian province, and thence proceeded

through the heart of the country, making his way by

canoe on the rivers and their tributaries, and by foot

into the forests and marshes of a vast and almost

untrodden wilderness. In this manner Mr. Brauner

traversed about two thousand miles of the comparatively

unknown interior of Southern Brazil, and procured

a large variety of fibrous specimens, which he

shipped to Edison a few months later. When these

fibres arrived in the United States they were carefully

tested and a few of them found suitable but not

superior to the Japanese bamboo, which was then

being exclusively used in the manufacture of commercial

Edison lamps.



Later on Edison sent out an expedition to explore

the wilds of Cuba and Jamaica. A two months'

investigation of the latter island revealed a variety

of bamboo growths, of which a great number of specimens

were obtained and shipped to Menlo Park; but

on careful test they were found inferior to the Jap-

anese bamboo, and hence rejected. The exploration

of the glades and swamps of Florida by three men

extended over a period of five months in a minute

search for fibrous woods of the palmetto species. A

great variety was found, and over five hundred boxes

of specimens were shipped to the laboratory from

time to time, but none of them tested out with entirely

satisfactory results.



The use of Japanese bamboo for carbon filaments

was therefore continued in the manufacture of lamps,

although an incessant search was maintained for a

still more perfect material. The spirit of progress,

so pervasive in Edison's character, led him, however,

to renew his investigations further afield by sending

out two other men to examine the bamboo and

similar growths of those parts of South America not

covered by Mr. Brauner. These two men were Frank

McGowan and C. F. Hanington, both of whom had

been for nearly seven years in the employ of the

Edison Electric Light Company in New York. The

former was a stocky, rugged Irishman, possessing the

native shrewdness and buoyancy of his race, coupled

with undaunted courage and determination; and the

latter was a veteran of the Civil War, with some

knowledge of forest and field, acquired as a sportsman.

They left New York in September, 1887, arriving

in due time at Para, proceeding thence twenty-

three hundred miles up the Amazon River to Iquitos.

Nothing of an eventful nature occurred during this

trip, but on arrival at Iquitos the two men separated;

Mr. McGowan to explore on foot and by canoe in

Peru, Ecuador, and Colombia, while Mr. Hanington

returned by the Amazon River to Para. Thence

Hanington went by steamer to Montevideo, and by

similar conveyance up the River de la Plata and

through Uruguay, Argentine, and Paraguay to the

southernmost part of Brazil, collecting a large number

of specimens of palms and grasses.



The adventures of Mr. McGowan, after leaving

Iquitos, would fill a book if related in detail. The

object of the present narrative and the space at the

authors' disposal, however, do not permit of more

than a brief mention of his experiences. His first

objective point was Quito, about five hundred miles

away, which he proposed to reach on foot and by

means of canoeing on the Napo River through a wild

and comparatively unknown country teeming with

tribes of hostile natives. The dangers of the expedition

were pictured to him in glowing colors, but spurning

prophecies of dire disaster, he engaged some native

Indians and a canoe and started on his explorations,

reaching Quito in eighty-seven days, after a

thorough search of the country on both sides of the

Napo River. From Quito he went to Guayaquil,

from there by steamer to Buenaventura, and thence

by rail, twelve miles, to Cordova. From this point

he set out on foot to explore the Cauca Valley and

the Cordilleras.



Mr. McGowan found in these regions a great variety

of bamboo, small and large, some species growing

seventy-five to one hundred feet in height, and from

six to nine inches in diameter. He collected a large

number of specimens, which were subsequently sent

to Orange for Edison's examination. After about

fifteen months of exploration attended by much hardship

and privation, deserted sometimes by treacherous

guides, twice laid low by fevers, occasionally in peril

from Indian attacks, wild animals and poisonous

serpents, tormented by insect pests, endangered by

floods, one hundred and nineteen days without meat,

ninety-eight days without taking off his clothes, Mr.

McGowan returned to America, broken in health but

having faithfully fulfilled the commission intrusted

to him. The Evening Sun, New York, obtained an

interview with him at that time, and in its issue of

May 2, 1889, gave more than a page to a brief story

of his interesting adventures, and then commented

editorially upon them, as follows:





"A ROMANCE OF SCIENCE"





"The narrative given elsewhere in the Evening Sun

of the wanderings of Edison's missionary of science,

Mr. Frank McGowan, furnishes a new proof that the

romances of real life surpass any that the imagination

can frame.



"In pursuit of a substance that should meet the

requirements of the Edison incandescent lamp, Mr. McGowan

penetrated the wilderness of the Amazon, and for a year

defied its fevers, beasts, reptiles, and deadly insects in

his quest of a material so precious that jealous Nature

has hidden it in her most secret fastnesses.



"No hero of mythology or fable ever dared such

dragons to rescue some captive goddess as did this

dauntless champion of civilization. Theseus, or Siegfried,

or any knight of the fairy books might envy the

victories of Edison's irresistible lieutenant.



"As a sample story of adventure, Mr. McGowan's narrative

is a marvel fit to be classed with the historic jour-

neyings of the greatest travellers. But it gains immensely

in interest when we consider that it succeeded in its

scientific purpose. The mysterious bamboo was discovered,

and large quantities of it were procured and

brought to the Wizard's laboratory, there to suffer another

wondrous change and then to light up our pleasure-

haunts and our homes with a gentle radiance."





A further, though rather sad, interest attaches to

the McGowan story, for only a short time had

elapsed after his return to America when he disappeared

suddenly and mysteriously, and in spite of

long-continued and strenuous efforts to obtain some

light on the subject, no clew or trace of him was ever

found. He was a favorite among the Edison "oldtimers,"

and his memory is still cherished, for when

some of the "boys" happen to get together, as they

occasionally do, some one is almost sure to "wonder

what became of poor `Mac.' " He was last seen at

Mouquin's famous old French restaurant on Fulton

Street, New York, where he lunched with one of the

authors of this book and the late Luther Stieringer.

He sat with them for two or three hours discussing

his wonderful trip, and telling some fascinating stories

of adventure. Then the party separated at the Ann

Street door of the restaurant, after making plans to

secure the narrative in more detailed form for

subsequent use--and McGowan has not been seen from

that hour to this. The trail of the explorer was more

instantly lost in New York than in the vast recesses

of the Amazon swamps.



The next and last explorer whom Edison sent out

in search of natural fibres was Mr. James Ricalton,

of Maplewood, New Jersey, a school-principal, a well-

known traveller, and an ardent student of natural

science. Mr. Ricalton's own story of his memorable

expedition is so interesting as to be worthy of repetition

here:



"A village schoolmaster is not unaccustomed to

door-rappings; for the steps of belligerent mothers

are often thitherward bent seeking redress for conjured

wrongs to their darling boobies.



"It was a bewildering moment, therefore, to the

Maplewood teacher when, in answering a rap at the

door one afternoon, he found, instead of an irate

mother, a messenger from the laboratory of the

world's greatest inventor bearing a letter requesting

an audience a few hours later.



"Being the teacher to whom reference is made, I

am now quite willing to confess that for the remainder

of that afternoon, less than a problem in Euclid would

have been sufficient to disqualify me for the remaining

scholastic duties of the hour. I felt it, of course,

to be no small honor for a humble teacher to be called

to the sanctum of Thomas A. Edison. The letter,

however, gave no intimation of the nature of the

object for which I had been invited to appear before

Mr. Edison....



"When I was presented to Mr. Edison his way of

setting forth the mission he had designated for me

was characteristic of how a great mind conceives vast

undertakings and commands great things in few

words. At this time Mr. Edison had discovered that

the fibre of a certain bamboo afforded a very desirable

carbon for the electric lamp, and the variety of bam-

boo used was a product of Japan. It was his belief

that in other parts of the world other and superior

varieties might be found, and to that end he had

dispatched explorers to bamboo regions in the valleys

of the great South American rivers, where specimens

were found of extraordinary quality; but the locality

in which these specimens were found was lost in the

limitless reaches of those great river-bottoms. The

great necessity for more durable carbons became a

desideratum so urgent that the tireless inventor decided

to commission another explorer to search the

tropical jungles of the Orient.



"This brings me then to the first meeting of Edison,

when he set forth substantially as follows, as I remember

it twenty years ago, the purpose for which

he had called me from my scholastic duties. With

a quizzical gleam in his eye, he said: `I want a man

to ransack all the tropical jungles of the East to find

a better fibre for my lamp; I expect it to be found

in the palm or bamboo family. How would you like


that job?' Suiting my reply to his love of brevity

and dispatch, I said, `That would suit me.' `Can

you go to-morrow?' was his next question. `Well,

Mr. Edison, I must first of all get a leave of absence

from my Board of Education, and assist the board to

secure a substitute for the time of my absence. How

long will it take, Mr. Edison?' `How can I tell?

Maybe six months, and maybe five years; no matter

how long, find it.' He continued: `I sent a man to

South America to find what I want; he found it;

but lost the place where he found it, so he might

as well never have found it at all.' Hereat I was

enjoined to proceed forthwith to court the Board

of Education for a leave of absence, which I did

successfully, the board considering that a call so

important and honorary was entitled to their

unqualified favor, which they generously granted.



"I reported to Mr. Edison on the following day,

when he instructed me to come to the laboratory at

once to learn all the details of drawing and carbonizing

fibres, which it would be necessary to do in the

Oriental jungles. This I did, and, in the mean time,

a set of suitable tools for this purpose had been ordered

to be made in the laboratory. As soon as I

learned my new trade, which I accomplished in a few

days, Mr. Edison directed me to the library of the

laboratory to occupy a few days in studying the

geography of the Orient and, particularly, in drawing

maps of the tributaries of the Ganges, the Irrawaddy,

and the Brahmaputra rivers, and other regions which

I expected to explore.



"It was while thus engaged that Mr. Edison came

to me one day and said: `If you will go up to the

house' (his palatial home not far away) `and look behind

the sofa in the library you will find a joint of

bamboo, a specimen of that found in South America;

bring it down and make a study of it; if you find

something equal to that I will be satisfied.' At the

home I was guided to the library by an Irish servant-

woman, to whom I communicated my knowledge of

the definite locality of the sample joint. She plunged

her arm, bare and herculean, behind the aforementioned

sofa, and holding aloft a section of wood,

called out in a mood of discovery: `Is that it?'

Replying in the affirmative, she added, under an

impulse of innocent divination that whatever her

wizard master laid hands upon could result in nothing

short of an invention, `Sure, sor, and what's he

going to invint out o' that?'



"My kit of tools made, my maps drawn, my

Oriental geography reviewed, I come to the point

when matters of immediate departure are discussed;

and when I took occasion to mention to my chief

that, on the subject of life insurance, underwriters

refuse to take any risks on an enterprise so hazardous,

Mr. Edison said that, if I did not place too high

a valuation on my person, he would take the risk

himself. I replied that I was born and bred in New

York State, but now that I had become a Jersey man

I did not value myself at above fifteen hundred dollars.

Edison laughed and said that he would assume

the risk, and another point was settled. The next

matter was the financing of the trip, about which

Mr. Edison asked in a tentative way about the rates

to the East. I told him the expense of such a trip

could not be determined beforehand in detail, but that

I had established somewhat of a reputation for

economic travel, and that I did not believe any

traveller could surpass me in that respect. He desired

no further assurance in that direction, and thereupon

ordered a letter of credit made out with authorization

to order a second when the first was exhausted.

Herein then are set forth in briefest space the

preliminaries of a circuit of the globe in quest of fibre.



"It so happened that the day on which I set out

fell on Washington's Birthday, and I suggested to my

boys and girls at school that they make a line across

the station platform near the school at Maplewood,

and from this line I would start eastward around

the world, and if good-fortune should bring me back

I would meet them from the westward at the same

line. As I had often made them `toe the scratch,'

for once they were only too well pleased to have me

toe the line for them.



"This was done, and I sailed via England and the

Suez Canal to Ceylon, that fair isle to which Sindbad

the Sailor made his sixth voyage, picturesquely

referred to in history as the `brightest gem in the

British Colonial Crown.' I knew Ceylon to be eminently

tropical; I knew it to be rich in many varieties

of the bamboo family, which has been called the king

of the grasses; and in this family had I most hope of

finding the desired fibre. Weeks were spent in this

paradisiacal isle. Every part was visited. Native

wood craftsmen were offered a premium on every

new species brought in, and in this way nearly a hundred

species were tested, a greater number than was

found in any other country. One of the best specimens

tested during the entire trip around the world

was found first in Ceylon, although later in Burmah,

it being indigenous to the latter country. It is a

gigantic tree-grass or reed growing in clumps of from

one to two hundred, often twelve inches in diameter,

and one hundred and fifty feet high, and known as

the giant bamboo (Bambusa gigantia). This giant

grass stood the highest test as a carbon, and on account

of its extraordinary size and qualities I extend

it this special mention. With others who have given

much attention to this remarkable reed, I believe that

in its manifold uses the bamboo is the world's greatest

dendral benefactor.



"From Ceylon I proceeded to India, touching the

great peninsula first at Cape Comorin, and continuing

northward by way of Pondicherry, Madura, and

Madras; and thence to the tableland of Bangalore

and the Western Ghauts, testing many kinds of wood

at every point, but particularly the palm and bamboo

families. From the range of the Western Ghauts

I went to Bombay and then north by the way of

Delhi to Simla, the summer capital of the Himalayas;

thence again northward to the headwaters of the

Sutlej River, testing everywhere on my way everything

likely to afford the desired carbon.



"On returning from the mountains I followed the

valleys of the Jumna and the Ganges to Calcutta,

whence I again ascended the Sub-Himalayas to

Darjeeling, where the numerous river-bottoms were

sprinkled plentifully with many varieties of bamboo,

from the larger sizes to dwarfed species covering the

mountain slopes, and not longer than the grass of

meadows. Again descending to the plains I passed

eastward to the Brahmaputra River, which I ascended

to the foot-hills in Assam; but finding nothing of

superior quality in all this northern region I returned

to Calcutta and sailed thence to Rangoon, in Burmah;

and there, finding no samples giving more excellent

tests in the lower reaches of the Irrawaddy, I ascended

that river to Mandalay, where, through Burmese

bamboo wiseacres, I gathered in from round about

and tested all that the unusually rich Burmese flora

could furnish. In Burmah the giant bamboo, as already

mentioned, is found indigenous; but beside it

no superior varieties were found. Samples tested

at several points on the Malay Peninsula showed no

new species, except at a point north of Singapore,

where I found a species large and heavy which gave

a test nearly equal to that of the giant bamboo in

Ceylon.



"After completing the Malay Peninsula I had

planned to visit Java and Borneo; but having found

in the Malay Peninsula and in Ceylon a bamboo

fibre which averaged a test from one to two hundred

per cent. better than that in use at the lamp factory,

I decided it was unnecessary to visit these countries

or New Guinea, as my `Eureka' had already been

established, and that I would therefore set forth over

the return hemisphere, searching China and Japan

on the way. The rivers in Southern China brought

down to Canton bamboos of many species, where this

wondrously utilitarian reed enters very largely into

the industrial life of that people, and not merely into

the industrial life, but even into the culinary arts,

for bamboo sprouts are a universal vegetable in

China; but among all the bamboos of China I

found none of superexcellence in carbonizing qualities.

Japan came next in the succession of countries to be

explored, but there the work was much simplified,

from the fact that the Tokio Museum contains a

complete classified collection of all the different species

in the empire, and there samples could be obtained

and tested.



"Now the last of the important bamboo-producing

countries in the globe circuit had been done, and

the `home-lap' was in order; the broad Pacific was

spanned in fourteen days; my natal continent in six;

and on the 22d of February, on the same day, at the

same hour, at the same minute, one year to a second,

`little Maude,' a sweet maid of the school, led me

across the line which completed the circuit of the

globe, and where I was greeted by the cheers of my

boys and girls. I at once reported to Mr. Edison,

whose manner of greeting my return was as characteristic

of the man as his summary and matter-of-

fact manner of my dispatch. His little catechism

of curious inquiry was embraced in four small and

intensely Anglo-Saxon words--with his usual pleasant

smile he extended his hand and said: `Did you

get it?' This was surely a summing of a year's exploration

not less laconic than Caesar's review of his

Gallic campaign. When I replied that I had, but

that he must be the final judge of what I had found,

he said that during my absence he had succeeded in

making an artificial carbon which was meeting the

requirements satisfactorily; so well, indeed, that I

believe no practical use was ever made of the bamboo

fibres thereafter.



"I have herein given a very brief resume of my

search for fibre through the Orient; and during my

connection with that mission I was at all times not

less astonished at Mr. Edison's quick perception of

conditions and his instant decision and his bigness

of conceptions, than I had always been with his

prodigious industry and his inventive genius.



"Thinking persons know that blatant men never

accomplish much, and Edison's marvellous brevity

of speech along with his miraculous achievements

should do much to put bores and garrulity out of

fashion."



Although Edison had instituted such a costly and

exhaustive search throughout the world for the most

perfect of natural fibres, he did not necessarily feel

committed for all time to the exclusive use of that

material for his lamp filaments. While these

explorations were in progress, as indeed long before,

he had given much thought to the production of some

artificial compound that would embrace not only the

required homogeneity, but also many other qualifications

necessary for the manufacture of an improved

type of lamp which had become desirable by reason

of the rapid adoption of his lighting system.



At the very time Mr. McGowan was making his

explorations deep in South America, and Mr. Ricalton

his swift trip around the world, Edison, after

much investigation and experiment, had produced

a compound which promised better results than bamboo

fibres. After some changes dictated by experience,

this artificial filament was adopted in the

manufacture of lamps. No radical change was

immediately made, however, but the product of the

lamp factory was gradually changed over, during the

course of a few years, from the use of bamboo to the

"squirted" filament, as the new material was called.

An artificial compound of one kind or another has

indeed been universally adopted for the purpose by

all manufacturers; hence the incandescing conductors

in all carbon-filament lamps of the present day are

made in that way. The fact remains, however, that

for nearly nine years all Edison lamps (many millions

in the aggregate) were made with bamboo filaments,

and many of them for several years after that, until

bamboo was finally abandoned in the early nineties,

except for use in a few special types which were so

made until about the end of 1908. The last few years

have witnessed a remarkable advance in the manufacture

of incandescent lamps in the substitution of

metallic filaments for those of carbon. It will be

remembered that many of the earlier experiments were

based on the use of strips of platinum; while other

rare metals were the subject of casual trial. No real

success was attained in that direction, and for many

years the carbon-filament lamp reigned supreme.

During the last four or five years lamps with filaments

made from tantalum and tungsten have been

produced and placed on the market with great success,

and are now largely used. Their price is still

very high, however, as compared with that of the

carbon lamp, which has been vastly improved in

methods of construction, and whose average price

of fifteen cents is only one-tenth of what it was when

Edison first brought it out.



With the close of Mr. McGowan's and Mr. Ricalton's

expeditions, there ended the historic world-hunt

for natural fibres. From start to finish the investigations

and searches made by Edison himself, and carried

on by others under his direction, are remarkable

not only from the fact that they entailed a total

expenditure of about $100,000, (disbursed under his

supervision by Mr. Upton), but also because of

their unique inception and thoroughness they illustrate

one of the strongest traits of his character--an

invincible determination to leave no stone unturned

to acquire that which he believes to be in existence,

and which, when found, will answer the purpose that

he has in mind.

