





CHAPTER XXVI



EDISON IN COMMERCE AND MANUFACTURE



AN applicant for membership in the Engineers'

Club of Philadelphia is required to give a brief

statement of the professional work he has done.

Some years ago a certain application was made, and

contained the following terse and modest sentence:





"I have designed a concentrating plant and built a

machine shop, etc., etc.              THOMAS A. EDISON."





Although in the foregoing pages the reader has been

made acquainted with the tremendous import of the

actualities lying behind those "etc., etc.," the narrative

up to this point has revealed Edison chiefly in

the light of inventor, experimenter, and investigator.

There have been some side glimpses of the industries

he has set on foot, and of their financial aspects, and

a later chapter will endeavor to sum up the intrinsic

value of Edison's work to the world. But there are

some other interesting points that may be touched on

now in regard to a few of Edison's financial and commercial

ventures not generally known or appreciated.



It is a popular idea founded on experience that an

inventor is not usually a business man. One of the

exceptions proving the rule may perhaps be met in

Edison, though all depends on the point of view.

All his life he has had a great deal to do with finance

and commerce, and as one looks at the magnitude of

the vast industries he has helped to create, it would

not be at all unreasonable to expect him to be among

the multi-millionaires. That he is not is due to the

absence of certain qualities, the lack of which Edison

is himself the first to admit. Those qualities may not

be amiable, but great wealth is hardly ever accumulated

without them. If he had not been so intent

on inventing he would have made more of his great

opportunities for getting rich. If this utter detachment

from any love of money for its own sake has not

already been illustrated in some of the incidents

narrated, one or two stories are available to emphasize

the point. They do not involve any want of the higher

business acumen that goes to the proper conduct

of affairs. It was said of Gladstone that he was the

greatest Chancellor of the Exchequer England ever

saw, but that as a retail merchant he would soon

have ruined himself by his bookkeeping.



Edison confesses that he has never made a cent

out of his patents in electric light and power--in

fact, that they have been an expense to him, and thus

a free gift to the world.[18] This was true of the Euro-

pean patents as well as the American. "I endeavored

to sell my lighting patents in different countries

of Europe, and made a contract with a couple of

men. On account of their poor business capacity

and lack of practicality, they conveyed under the

patents all rights to different corporations but in

such a way and with such confused wording of the

contracts that I never got a cent. One of the companies

started was the German Edison, now the great

Allgemeine Elektricitaets Gesellschaft. The English

company I never got anything for, because a

lawyer had originally advised Drexel, Morgan & Co.

as to the signing of a certain document, and said it

was all right for me to sign. I signed, and I never

got a cent because there was a clause in it which

prevented me from ever getting anything." A certain

easy-going belief in human nature, and even a

certain carelessness of attitude toward business

affairs, are here revealed. We have already pointed

out two instances where in his dealings with the

Western Union Company he stipulated that payments

of $6000 per year for seventeen years were to

be made instead of $100,000 in cash, evidently forgetful

of the fact that the annual sum so received was

nothing more than legal interest, which could have

been earned indefinitely if the capital had been only

insisted upon. In later life Edison has been more

circumspect, but throughout his early career he was

constantly getting into some kind of scrape. Of one

experience he says:





[18] Edison received some stock from the parent lighting company,

but as the capital stock of that company was increased from time

to time, his proportion grew smaller, and he ultimately used it to

obtain ready money with which to create and finance the various

"shops" in which were manufactured the various items of electric-

lighting apparatus necessary to exploit his system. Besides, he

was obliged to raise additional large sums of money from other

sources for this purpose. He thus became a manufacturer with

capital raised by himself, and the stock that he received later, on

the formation of the General Electric Company, was not for his

electric-light patents, but was in payment for his manufacturing

establishments, which had then grown to be of great commercial

importance.







"In the early days I was experimenting with metallic

filaments for the incandescent light, and sent a

certain man out to California in search of platinum.

He found a considerable quantity in the sluice-boxes

of the Cherokee Valley Mining Company; but just

then he found also that fruit-gardening was the thing,

and dropped the subject. He then came to me and

said that if he could raise $4000 he could go into some

kind of orchard arrangement out there, and would

give me half the profits. I was unwilling to do it,

not having very much money just then, but his persistence

was such that I raised the money and gave

it to him. He went back to California, and got into

mining claims and into fruit-growing, and became

one of the politicians of the Coast, and, I believe, was

on the staff of the Governor of the State. A couple

of years ago he wounded his daughter and shot himself

because he had become ruined financially. I

never heard from him after he got the money."



Edison tells of another similar episode. "I had two

men working for me--one a German, the other a Jew.

They wanted me to put up a little money and start

them in a shop in New York to make repairs, etc. I

put up $800, and was to get half of the profits, and

each of them one-quarter. I never got anything for

it. A few years afterward I went to see them, and

asked what they were doing, and said I would like

to sell my interest. They said: `Sell out what?'

`Why,' I said, `my interest in the machinery.' They

said: `You don't own this machinery. This is our

machinery. You have no papers to show anything.

You had better get out.' I am inclined to think that

the percentage of crooked people was smaller when

I was young. It has been steadily rising, and has got

up to a very respectable figure now. I hope it will

never reach par." To which lugubrious episode so

provocative of cynicism, Edison adds: "When I was

a young fellow the first thing I did when I went to

a town was to put something into the savings-bank

and start an account. When I came to New York

I put $30 into a savings-bank under the New York

Sun office. After the money had been in about two

weeks the bank busted. That was in 1870. In 1909

I got back $6.40, with a charge for $1.75 for law

expenses. That shows the beauty of New York

receiverships."



It is hardly to be wondered at that Edison is rather

frank and unsparing in some of his criticisms of shady

modern business methods, and the mention of the

following incident always provokes him to a fine

scorn. "I had an interview with one of the wealthiest

men in New York. He wanted me to sell out my

associates in the electric lighting business, and offered

me all I was going to get and $100,000 besides. Of

course I would not do it. I found out that the reason

for this offer was that he had had trouble with Mr.

Morgan, and wanted to get even with him." Wall

Street is, in fact, a frequent object of rather sarcastic

reference, applying even to its regular and probably

correct methods of banking. "When I was running

my ore-mine," he says, "and got up to the point of

making shipments to John Fritz, I didn't have capital

enough to carry the ore, so I went to J. P. Morgan &

Co. and said I wanted them to give me a letter

to the City Bank. I wanted to raise some money.

I got a letter to Mr. Stillman; and went over and told

him I wanted to open an account and get some loans

and discounts. He turned me down, and would not

do it. `Well,' I said, `isn't it banking to help a man

in this way?' He said: `What you want is a partner.'

I felt very much crestfallen. I went over to a bank

in Newark--the Merchants'--and told them what I

wanted. They said: `Certainly, you can have the

money.' I made my deposit, and they pulled me

through all right. My idea of Wall Street banking

has been very poor since that time. Merchant banking

seems to be different."



As a general thing, Edison has had no trouble in

raising money when he needed it, the reason being

that people have faith in him as soon as they come

to know him. A little incident bears on this point.

"In operating the Schenectady works Mr. Insull and

I had a terrible burden. We had enormous orders and

little money, and had great difficulty to meet our pay-

rolls and buy supplies. At one time we had so many

orders on hand we wanted $200,000 worth of copper,

and didn't have a cent to buy it. We went down to

the Ansonia Brass and Copper Company, and told Mr.

Cowles just how we stood. He said: `I will see what

I can do. Will you let my bookkeeper look at your

books?' We said: `Come right up and look them

over.' He sent his man up and found we had the

orders and were all right, although we didn't have the

money. He said: `I will let you have the copper.'

And for years he trusted us for all the copper we wanted,

even if we didn't have the money to pay for it."



It is not generally known that Edison, in addition

to being a newsboy and a contributor to the technical

press, has also been a backer and an "angel" for

various publications. This is perhaps the right place

at which to refer to the matter, as it belongs in the

list of his financial or commercial enterprises. Edison

sums up this chapter of his life very pithily. "I was

interested, as a telegrapher, in journalism, and started

the Telegraph Journal, and got out about a dozen

numbers when it was taken over by W. J. Johnston,

who afterward founded the Electrical World on it as

an offshoot from the Operator. I also started Science,

and ran it for a year and a half. It cost me too much

money to maintain, and I sold it to Gardiner Hubbard,

the father-in-law of Alexander Graham Bell.

He carried it along for years." Both these papers are

still in prosperous existence, particularly the Electrical

World, as the recognized exponent of electrical

development in America, where now the public spends

as much annually for electricity as it does for daily

bread.



From all that has been said above it will be understood

that Edison's real and remarkable capacity for

business does not lie in ability to "take care of himself,"

nor in the direction of routine office practice,

nor even in ordinary administrative affairs. In short,

he would and does regard it as a foolish waste of his

time to give attention to the mere occupancy of a

desk.



His commercial strength manifests itself rather in

the outlining of matters relating to organization and

broad policy with a sagacity arising from a shrewd

perception and appreciation of general business

requirements and conditions, to which should be added

his intensely comprehensive grasp of manufacturing

possibilities and details, and an unceasing vigilance

in devising means of improving the quality of products

and increasing the economy of their manufacture.



Like other successful commanders, Edison also possesses

the happy faculty of choosing suitable lieutenants

to carry out his policies and to manage the

industries he has created, such, for instance, as those

with which this chapter has to deal--namely, the

phonograph, motion picture, primary battery, and

storage battery enterprises.



The Portland cement business has already been

dealt with separately, and although the above remarks

are appropriate to it also, Edison being its head and

informing spirit, the following pages are intended to

be devoted to those industries that are grouped around

the laboratory at Orange, and that may be taken as

typical of Edison's methods on the manufacturing side.



Within a few months after establishing himself at

the present laboratory, in 1887, Edison entered upon

one of those intensely active periods of work that

have been so characteristic of his methods in

commercializing his other inventions. In this case his

labors were directed toward improving the phonograph

so as to put it into thoroughly practicable

form, capable of ordinary use by the public at large.

The net result of this work was the general type of

machine of which the well-known phonograph of today

is a refinement evolved through many years of

sustained experiment and improvement.



After a considerable period of strenuous activity

in the eighties, the phonograph and its wax records

were developed to a sufficient degree of perfection to

warrant him in making arrangements for their manufacture

and commercial introduction. At this time

the surroundings of the Orange laboratory were

distinctly rural in character. Immediately adjacent to

the main building and the four smaller structures,

constituting the laboratory plant, were grass meadows

that stretched away for some considerable distance

in all directions, and at its back door, so to

speak, ducks paddled around and quacked in a pond

undisturbed. Being now ready for manufacturing,

but requiring more facilities, Edison increased his

real-estate holdings by purchasing a large tract of

land lying contiguous to what he already owned. At

one end of the newly acquired land two unpretentious

brick structures were erected, equipped with first-

class machinery, and put into commission as shops

for manufacturing phonographs and their record

blanks; while the capacious hall forming the third

story of the laboratory, over the library, was fitted

up and used as a music-room where records were

made.



Thus the modern Edison phonograph made its

modest debut in 1888, in what was then called the

"Improved" form to distinguish it from the original

style of machine he invented in 1877, in which the

record was made on a sheet of tin-foil held in place

upon a metallic cylinder. The "Improved" form is

the general type so well known for many years and

sold at the present day--viz., the spring or electric

motor-driven machine with the cylindrical wax record--in

fact, the regulation Edison phonograph.



It did not take a long time to find a market for the

products of the newly established factory, for a world-

wide public interest in the machine had been created

by the appearance of newspaper articles from time

to time, announcing the approaching completion by

Edison of his improved phonograph. The original

(tin-foil) machine had been sufficient to illustrate the

fact that the human voice and other sounds could

be recorded and reproduced, but such a type

of machine had sharp limitations in general use;

hence the coming into being of a type that any

ordinary person could handle was sufficient of itself

to insure a market. Thus the demand for the new

machines and wax records grew apace as the corporations

organized to handle the business extended their

lines. An examination of the newspaper files of the

years 1888, 1889, and 1890 will reveal the great

excitement caused by the bringing out of the new

phonograph, and how frequently and successfully it

was employed in public entertainments, either for

the whole or part of an evening. In this and other

ways it became popularized to a still further extent.

This led to the demand for a nickel-in-the-slot

machine, which, when established, became immensely

popular over the whole country. In its earlier forms

the "Improved" phonograph was not capable of

such general non-expert handling as is the machine

of the present day, and consequently there was a

constant endeavor on Edison's part to simplify the

construction of the machine and its manner of opera-

tion. Experimentation was incessantly going on with

this in view, and in the processes of evolution changes

were made here and there that resulted in a still greater

measure of perfection.



In various ways there was a continual slow and

steady growth of the industry thus created, necessitating

the erection of many additional buildings as the

years passed by. During part of the last decade

there was a lull, caused mostly from the failure of

corporate interests to carry out their contract relations

with Edison, and he was thereby compelled to

resort to legal proceedings, at the end of which he

bought in the outstanding contracts and assumed

command of the business personally.



Being thus freed from many irksome restrictions

that had hung heavily upon him, Edison now proceeded

to push the phonograph business under a

broader policy than that which obtained under his

previous contractual relations. With the ever-increasing

simplification and efficiency of the machine

and a broadening of its application, the results of this

policy were manifested in a still more rapid growth

of the business that necessitated further additions to

the manufacturing plant. And thus matters went on

until the early part of the present decade, when the

factory facilities were becoming so rapidly outgrown

as to render radical changes necessary. It

was in these circumstances that Edison's sagacity and

breadth of business capacity came to the front. With

characteristic boldness and foresight he planned the

erection of the series of magnificent concrete buildings

that now stand adjacent to and around the

laboratory, and in which the manufacturing plant is

at present housed.



There was no narrowness in his views in designing

these buildings, but, on the contrary, great faith in

the future, for his plans included not only the phonograph

industry, but provided also for the coming

development of motion pictures and of the primary

and storage battery enterprises.



In the aggregate there are twelve structures (including

the administration building), of which six

are of imposing dimensions, running from 200 feet

long by 50 feet wide to 440 feet in length by 115 feet

in width, all these larger buildings, except one, being

five stories in height. They are constructed entirely

of reinforced concrete with Edison cement, including

walls, floors, and stairways, thus eliminating fire

hazard to the utmost extent, and insuring a high

degree of protection, cleanliness, and sanitation. As

fully three-fourths of the area of their exterior framework

consists of windows, an abundance of daylight

is secured. These many advantages, combined with

lofty ceilings on every floor, provide ideal conditions

for the thousands of working people engaged in this

immense plant.



In addition to these twelve concrete structures

there are a few smaller brick and wooden buildings on

the grounds, in which some special operations are

conducted. These, however, are few in number, and

at some future time will be concentrated in one or

more additional concrete buildings. It will afford a

clearer idea of the extent of the industries clustered

immediately around the laboratory when it is stated

that the combined floor space which is occupied by

them in all these buildings is equivalent in the aggregate

to over fourteen acres.



It would be instructive, but scarcely within the

scope of the narrative, to conduct the reader through

this extensive plant and see its many interesting

operations in detail. It must suffice, however, to

note its complete and ample equipment with modern

machinery of every kind applicable to the work;

its numerous (and some of them wonderfully ingenious)

methods, processes, machines, and tools

specially designed or invented for the manufacture

of special parts and supplemental appliances for the

phonograph or other Edison products; and also to

note the interesting variety of trades represented in

the different departments, in which are included

chemists, electricians, electrical mechanicians, machinists,

mechanics, pattern-makers, carpenters, cabinet-makers,

varnishers, japanners, tool-makers, lapidaries,

wax experts, photographic developers and

printers, opticians, electroplaters, furnacemen, and

others, together with factory experimenters and a

host of general employees, who by careful training

have become specialists and experts in numerous

branches of these industries.



Edison's plans for this manufacturing plant were

sufficiently well outlined to provide ample capacity

for the natural growth of the business; and although

that capacity (so far as phonographs is concerned)

has actually reached an output of over 6000 complete

phonographs PER WEEK, and upward of 130,000

molded records PER DAY--with a pay-roll embracing

over 3500 employees, including office force--and

amounting to about $45,000 per week--the limits of

production have not yet been reached.



The constant outpouring of products in such large

quantities bespeaks the unremitting activities of an

extensive and busy selling organization to provide

for their marketing and distribution. This important

department (the National Phonograph Company), in

all its branches, from president to office-boy, includes

about two hundred employees on its office pay-roll, and

makes its headquarters in the administration building,

which is one of the large concrete structures

above referred to. The policy of the company is to

dispose of its wares through regular trade channels

rather than to deal direct with the public, trusting

to local activity as stimulated by a liberal policy of

national advertising. Thus, there has been gradually

built up a very extensive business until at the present

time an enormous output of phonographs and records

is distributed to retail customers in the United

States and Canada through the medium of about

one hundred and fifty jobbers and over thirteen

thousand dealers. The Edison phonograph industry

thus organized is helped by frequent conventions of

this large commercial force.



Besides this, the National Phonograph Company

maintains a special staff for carrying on the business

with foreign countries. While the aggregate transactions

of this department are not as extensive as

those for the United States and Canada, they are of

considerable volume, as the foreign office distributes

in bulk a very large number of phonographs and rec-

ords to selling companies and agencies in Europe,

Asia, Australia, Japan, and, indeed, to all the countries

of the civilized world.[19] Like England's drumbeat,

the voice of the Edison phonograph is heard around

the world in undying strains throughout the twenty-

four hours.





[19] It may be of interest to the reader to note some parts of

the globe to which shipments of phonographs and records are made:



Samoan Islands

Falkland Islands

Siam

Corea

Crete Island

Paraguay

Chile

Canary Islands

Egypt

British East Africa

Cape Colony

Portuguese East Africa

Liberia

Java

Straits Settlements

Madagascar

Fanning Islands

New Zealand

French Indo-China

Morocco

Ecuador

Brazil

Madeira

South Africa

Azores

Manchuria

Ceylon

Sierra

Leone







In addition to the main manufacturing plant at

Orange, another important adjunct must not be forgotten,

and that is, the Recording Department in

New York City, where the master records are made

under the superintendence of experts who have

studied the intricacies of the art with Edison himself.

This department occupies an upper story in

a lofty building, and in its various rooms may be

seen and heard many prominent musicians, vocalists,

speakers, and vaudeville artists studiously and busily

engaged in making the original records, which are

afterward sent to Orange, and which, if approved by

the expert committee, are passed on to the proper

department for reproduction in large quantities.



When we consider the subject of motion pictures

we find a similarity in general business methods, for

while the projecting machines and copies of picture

films are made in quantity at the Orange works (just

as phonographs and duplicate records are so made),

the original picture, or film, like the master record,

is made elsewhere. There is this difference, however:

that, from the particular nature of the work, practically

ALL master records are made at one convenient

place, while the essential interest in SOME motion

pictures lies in the fact that they are taken in various

parts of the world, often under exceptional circumstances.

The "silent drama," however, calls also for

many representations which employ conventional

acting, staging, and the varied appliances of stage-

craft. Hence, Edison saw early the necessity of

providing a place especially devised and arranged for

the production of dramatic performances in pantomime.



It is a far cry from the crude structure of early

days--the "Black Maria" of 1891, swung around on

its pivot in the Orange laboratory yard--to the well-

appointed Edison theatres, or pantomime studios, in

New York City. The largest of these is located in

the suburban Borough of the Bronx, and consists of

a three-story-and-basement building of reinforced

concrete, in which are the offices, dressing-rooms,

wardrobe and property-rooms, library and developing

department. Contiguous to this building, and

connected with it, is the theatre proper, a large and

lofty structure whose sides and roof are of glass, and

whose floor space is sufficiently ample for six different

sets of scenery at one time, with plenty of room left

for a profusion of accessories, such as tables, chairs,

pianos, bunch-lights, search-lights, cameras, and a

host of varied paraphernalia pertaining to stage

effects.



The second Edison theatre, or studio, is located

not far from the shopping district in New York City.

In all essential features, except size and capacity, it

is a duplicate of the one in the Bronx, of which it

is a supplement.



To a visitor coming on the floor of such a theatre

for the first time there is a sense of confusion in

beholding the heterogeneous "sets" of scenery and the

motley assemblage of characters represented in the

various plays in the process of "taking," or rehearsal.

While each set constitutes virtually a separate stage,

they are all on the same floor, without wings or

proscenium-arches, and separated only by a few feet.

Thus, for instance, a Japanese house interior may be

seen cheek by jowl with an ordinary prison cell,

flanked by a mining-camp, which in turn stands next

to a drawing-room set, and in each a set of appropriate

characters in pantomimic motion. The action

is incessant, for in any dramatic representation

intended for the motion-picture film every second

counts.



The production of several completed plays per

week necessitates the employment of a considerable

staff of people of miscellaneous trades and abilities.

At each of these two studios there is employed a

number of stage-directors, scene-painters, carpenters,

property-men, photographers, costumers, electricians,

clerks, and general assistants, besides a capable stock

company of actors and actresses, whose generous num-

bers are frequently augmented by the addition of a

special star, or by a number of extra performers, such

as Rough Riders or other specialists. It may be,

occasionally, that the exigencies of the occasion require

the work of a performing horse, dog, or other animal.

No matter what the object required may be, whether

animate or inanimate, if it is necessary for the play

it is found and pressed into service.



These two studios, while separated from the main

plant, are under the same general management, and

their original negative films are forwarded as made

to the Orange works, where the large copying department

is located in one of the concrete buildings.

Here, after the film has been passed upon by a committee,

a considerable number of positive copies are

made by ingenious processes, and after each one is

separately tested, or "run off," in one or other of the

three motion-picture theatres in the building, they

are shipped out to film exchanges in every part of

the country. How extensive this business has become

may be appreciated when it is stated that at

the Orange plant there are produced at this time

over eight million feet of motion-picture film per

year. And Edison's company is only one of many

producers.



Another of the industries at the Orange works is

the manufacture of projecting kinetoscopes, by means

of which the motion pictures are shown. While this

of itself is also a business of considerable magnitude

in its aggregate yearly transactions, it calls for no

special comment in regard to commercial production,

except to note that a corps of experimenters is con-

stantly employed refining and perfecting details of

the machine. Its basic features of operation as conceived

by Edison remain unchanged.



On coming to consider the Edison battery enterprises,

we must perforce extend the territorial view to

include a special chemical-manufacturing plant, which

is in reality a branch of the laboratory and the Orange

works, although actually situated about three miles

away.



Both the primary and the storage battery employ

certain chemical products as essential parts of their

elements, and indeed owe their very existence to the

peculiar preparation and quality of such products, as

exemplified by Edison's years of experimentation and

research. Hence the establishment of his own chemical

works at Silver Lake, where, under his personal

supervision, the manufacture of these products is carried

on in charge of specially trained experts. At the

present writing the plant covers about seven acres

of ground; but there is ample room for expansion,

as Edison, with wise forethought, secured over forty

acres of land, so as to be prepared for developments.



Not only is the Silver Lake works used for the

manufacture of the chemical substances employed in

the batteries, but it is the plant at which the Edison

primary battery is wholly assembled and made up

for distribution to customers. This in itself is a

business of no small magnitude, having grown steadily

on its merits year by year until it has now arrived at

a point where its sales run into the hundreds of

thousands of cells per annum, furnished largely to the

steam railroads of the country for their signal service.



As to the storage battery, the plant at Silver Lake

is responsible only for the production of the chemical

compounds, nickel-hydrate and iron oxide, which enter

into its construction. All the mechanical parts, the

nickel plating, the manufacture of nickel flake, the

assembling and testing, are carried on at the Orange

works in two of the large concrete buildings above

referred to. A visit to this part of the plant reveals an

amazing fertility of resourcefulness and ingenuity in the

devising of the special machines and appliances employed

in constructing the mechanical parts of these

cells, for it is practically impossible to fashion them

by means of machinery and tools to be found in the

open market, notwithstanding the immense variety

that may be there obtained.



Since Edison completed his final series of investigations

on his storage battery and brought it to its

present state of perfection, the commercial values

have increased by leaps and bounds. The battery,

as it was originally put out some years ago, made for

itself an enviable reputation; but with its improved

form there has come a vast increase of business.

Although the largest of the concrete buildings where

its manufacture is carried on is over four hundred

feet long and four stories in height, it has already

become necessary to plan extensions and enlargements

of the plant in order to provide for the production

of batteries to fill the present demands. It

was not until the summer of 1909 that Edison was

willing to pronounce the final verdict of satisfaction

with regard to this improved form of storage battery;

but subsequent commercial results have justified his

judgment, and it is not too much to predict that in

all probability the business will assume gigantic

proportions within a very few years. At the present

time (1910) the Edison storage-battery enterprise is

in its early stages of growth, and its status may be

compared with that of the electric-light system about

the year 1881.



There is one more industry, though of comparatively

small extent, that is included in the activities

of the Orange works, namely, the manufacture and

sale of the Bates numbering machine. This is a well-

known article of commerce, used in mercantile

establishments for the stamping of consecutive,

duplicate, and manifold numbers on checks and other

documents. It is not an invention of Edison, but

the organization owning it, together with the patent

rights, were acquired by him some years ago, and he

has since continued and enlarged the business both

in scope and volume, besides, of course, improving

and perfecting the apparatus itself. These machines

are known everywhere throughout the country, and

while the annual sales are of comparatively moderate

amount in comparison with the totals of the other

Edison industries at Orange, they represent in the

aggregate a comfortable and encouraging business.



In this brief outline review of the flourishing and

extensive commercial enterprises centred around the

Orange laboratory, the facts, it is believed, contain a

complete refutation of the idea that an inventor

cannot be a business man. They also bear abundant

evidence of the compatibility of these two widely

divergent gifts existing, even to a high degree, in the

same person. A striking example of the correctness

of this proposition is afforded in the present case,

when it is borne in mind that these various industries

above described (whose annual sales run into many

millions of dollars) owe not only their very creation

(except the Bates machine) and existence to Edison's

inventive originality and commercial initiative, but

also their continued growth and prosperity to his

incessant activities in dealing with their multifarious

business problems. In publishing a portrait of Edison

this year, one of the popular magazines placed under

it this caption: "Were the Age called upon to pay

Thomas A. Edison all it owes to him, the Age would

have to make an assignment." The present chapter

will have thrown some light on the idiosyncrasies of

Edison as financier and as manufacturer, and will

have shown that while the claim thus suggested may

be quite good, it will certainly never be pressed or

collected.

