


Ancient Law
by Henry Maine

Chapter 4

The Modern History of the Law of Nature

    It will be inferred from what has been said that the theory
which transformed the Roman jurisprudence had no claim to
philosophical precision. It involved, in fact, one of those
"mixed modes of thought" which are now acknowledged to have
characterised all but the highest minds during the infancy of
speculation, and which are far from undiscoverable even in the
mental efforts of our own day. The Law of Nature confused the
Past and the Present. Logically, it implied a state of Nature
which had once been regulated by natural law; yet the
jurisconsults do not speak clearly or confidently of the
existence of such a state, which indeed is little noticed by the
ancients except where it finds a poetical expression in the fancy
of a golden age. Natural law, for all practical purposes, was
something belonging to the present, something entwined with
existing institutions, something which could be distinguished
from them by a competent observer. The test which separated the
ordinances of Nature from the gross ingredients with which they
were mingled was a sense of simplicity and harmony; yet it was
not on account of their simplicity and harmony that these finer
elements were primarily respected, but on the score of their
descent from the aboriginal reign of Nature. This confusion has
not been successfully explained away by the modern disciples of
the jurisconsults, and in truth modern speculations on the Law of
Nature betray much more indistinctness of perception and are
vitiated by much more hopeless ambiguity of language than the
Roman lawyers can be justly charged with. There are some writers
on the subject who attempt to evade the fundamental difficulty by
contending that the code of Nature exists in the future and is
the goal to which all civil laws are moving, but this is to
reverse the assumptions on which the old theory rested, or rather
perhaps to mix together two inconsistent theories. The tendency
to look not to the past but to the future for types of perfection
was brought into the world by Christianity. Ancient literature
gives few or no hints of a belief that the progress of society is
necessarily from worse to better. 
    But the importance of this theory to mankind has been very
much greater than its philosophical deficiencies would lead us to
expect. Indeed, it is not easy to say what turn the history of
thought, and therefore, of the human race, would have taken, if
the belief in a law natural had not become universal in the
ancient world. 
    There are two special dangers to which law and society which
is held together by law, appear to be liable in their infancy.
One of them is that law may be too rapidly developed. This
occurred with the codes of the more progressive Greek
communities, which disembarrassed themselves with astonishing
facility from cumbrous forms of procedure and needless terms of
art, and soon ceased to attach any superstitious value to rigid
rules and prescriptions. It was not for the ultimate advantage of
mankind that they did so, though the immediate benefit conferred
on their citizens may have been considerable. One of the rarest
qualities of national character is the capacity for applying and
working out the law, as such, at the cost of constant
miscarriages of abstract justice, without at the same time losing
the hope or the wish that law may be conformed to a higher ideal.
The Greek intellect, with all its nobility and elasticity, was
quite unable to confine itself within the strait waistcoat of a
legal formula; and, if we may judge them by the popular courts of
Athens of whose working we possess accurate knowledge, the Greek
tribunals exhibited the strongest tendency to confound law and
fact. The remains of the Orators and the forensic commonplaces
preserved by Aristotle in his Treatise on Rhetoric, show that
questions of pure law were constantly argued on every
consideration which could possibly influence the mind of the
judges. No durable system of jurisprudence could be produced in
this way. A community which never hesitated to relax rules of
written law whenever they stood in the way of an ideally perfect
decision on the facts of particular cases, would only; if it
bequeathed any body of judicial principles to posterity bequeath
one consisting of the ideas of right and wrong which happened to
be prevalent at the time. Such a jurisprudence would contain no
framework to which the more advanced conceptions of subsequent
ages could be fitted. It would amount at best to a philosophy
marked with the imperfections of the civilisation under which it
grew up. 
    Few national societies have had their jurisprudence menaced
by this peculiar danger of precocious maturity and untimely
disintegration. It is certainly doubtful whether the Romans were
ever seriously threatened by it, but at any rate they had
adequate protection in their theory of Natural Law. For the
Natural Law of the jurisconsults was distinctly conceived by them
as a system which ought gradually to absorb civil laws, without
superseding them so long as they remained unrepealed. There was
no such impression of its sanctity abroad, that an appeal to it
would be likely to overpower the mind of a judge who was charged
with the superintendence of a particular litigation. The value
and serviceableness of the conception arose from its keeping
before the mental vision a type of perfect law, and from its
inspiring the hope of an indefinite approximation to it, at the
same time that it never tempted the practitioner or the citizen
to deny the obligation of existing laws which had not yet been
adjusted to the theory. It is important too to observe that this
model system, unlike many of those which have mocked men's hopes
in later days, was not entirely the product of imagination. It
was never thought of as founded on quite untested principles. The
notion was that it underlay existing law and must be looked for
through it. Its functions were in short remedial, not
revolutionary or anarchical. And this, unfortunately, is the
exact point at which the modern view of a Law of Nature has often
ceased to resemble the ancient. 
    The other liability to which the infancy of society is
exposed has prevented or arrested the progress of far the greater
part of mankind. The rigidity of primitive law, arising chiefly
from its early association and identification with religion, has
chained down the mass of the human race to those views of life
and conduct which they entertained at the time when their usages
were first consolidated into a systematic form. There were one or
two races exempted by a marvellous fate from this calamity, and
grafts from these stocks have fertilised a few modern societies,
but it is still true that, over the larger part of the world, the
perfection of law has always been considered as consisting in
adherence to the ground plan supposed to have been marked out by
the original legislator. If intellect has in such cases been
exercised on jurisprudence, it has uniformly prided itself on the
subtle perversity of the conclusions it could build on ancient
texts, without discoverable departure from their literal tenour.
I know no reason why the law of the Romans should be superior to
the laws of the Hindoos, unless the theory of Natural Law had
given it a type of excellence different from the usual one. In
this one exceptional instance, simplicity and symmetry were kept
before the eyes of a society whose influence on mankind was
destined to be prodigious from other causes, as the
characteristics of an ideal and absolutely perfect law. It is
impossible to overrate the importance to a nation or profession
of having a distinct object to aim at in the pursuit of
improvement. The secret of Bentham's immense influence in England
during the past thirty years is his success in placing such an
object before the country. He gave us a clear rule of reform.
English lawyers of the last century were probably too acute to be
blinded by the paradoxical commonplace that English law was the
perfection of human reason, but they acted as if they believed it
for want of any other principle to proceed upon. Bentham made the
good of the community take precedence of every other object, and
thus gave escape to a current which had long been trying to find
its way outwards. 
    It is not an altogether fanciful comparison if we call the
assumptions we have been describing the ancient counterpart of
Benthamism. The Roman theory guided men's efforts in the same
direction as the theory put into shape by the Englishman; its
practical results were not widely different from those which
would have been attained by a sect of law-reformers who
maintained a steady pursuit of the general good of the community.
It would be a mistake, however, to suppose it a conscious
anticipation of Bentham's principles. The happiness of mankind
is, no doubt, sometimes assigned, both in the popular and in the
legal literature of the Romans, as the proper object of remedial
legislation, but it is very remarkable how few and faint are the
testimonies to this principle compared with the tributes which
are constantly offered to the overshadowing claims of the Law of
Nature. It was not to anything resembling philanthropy, but to
their sense of simplicity and harmony -- of what they
significantly termed "elegance" -- that the Roman jurisconsults
freely surrendered themselves. The coincidence of their labours
with those which a more precise philosophy would have counselled
has been part of the good fortune of mankind. 
    Turning to the modern history of the law of nature, we find
it easier to convince ourselves of the vastness of its influence
than to pronounce confidently whether that influence has been
exerted for good or for evil. The doctrines and institutions
which may be attributed to it are the material of some of the
most violent controversies debated in our time, as will be seen
when it is stated that the theory of Natural Law is the source of
almost all the special ideas as to law, politics, and society
which France during the last hundred years has been the
instrument of diffusing over the western world. The part played
by jurists in French history, and the sphere of jural conceptions
in French thought, have always been remarkably large. It was not
indeed in France, but in Italy, that the juridical science of
modern Europe took its rise, but of the schools founded by
emissaries of the Italian universities in all parts of the
continent, and attempted (though vainly) to be set up in our
island, that established in France produced the greatest effect
on the fortunes of the country. The lawyers of France immediately
formed a strict alliance with the kings of the house of Capet,
and it was as much through their assertions of royal prerogative,
and through their interpretations of the rules of feudal
succession, as by the power of the sword, that the French
monarchy at last grew together out of the agglomeration of
provinces and dependencies. The enormous advantage which their
understanding with the lawyers conferred on the French kings in
the prosecution of their struggle with the great feudatories, the
aristocracy, and the church, can only be appreciated if we take
into account the ideas which prevailed in Europe far down into
the middle ages. There was, in the first place, a great
enthusiasm for generalisation and a curious admiration for all
general propositions, and consequently, in the field of law, an
involuntary reverence for every general formula which seemed to
embrace and sum up a number of the insulated rules which were
practised as usages in various localities. Such general formulas
it was, of course, not difficult for practitioners familiar with
the Corpus Juris or the Glosses to supply in almost any quantity.
There was, however, another cause which added yet more
considerably to the lawyers' power. At the period of which we are
speaking, there was universal vagueness of ideas as to the degree
and nature of the authority residing in written texts of law For
the most part, the peremptory preface, Ita scriptum est, seems to
have been sufficient to silence all objections. Where a mind of
our own day would jealously scrutinise the formula which had been
quoted, would inquire its source, and would (if necessary) deny
that the body of law to which it belonged had any authority to
supersede local customs, the elder jurist w ould not probably
have ventured to do more than question the applicability of the
rule, or at best cite some counter proposition from the Pandects
or the Canon Law. It is extremely necessary to bear in mind the
uncertainty of men's notions on this most important side of
juridical controversies, not only because it helps to explain the
weight which the lawyers threw into the monarchical scale, but on
account of the light which it sheds on several curious historical
problems. The motives of the author of the Forged Decretals and
his extraordinary success are rendered more intelligible by it.
And, to take a phenomenon of smaller interest, it assists us,
though only partially to understand the plagiarisms of Bracton.
That an English writer of the time of Henry III should have been
able to put off on his countrymen as a compendium of pure English
law a treatise of which the entire form and a third of the
contents were directly borrowed from the Corpus Juris, and that
he should have ventured on this experiment in a country where the
systematic study of the Roman law was formally proscribed, will
always be among the most hopeless enigmas in the history of
jurisprudence; but still it is something to lessen our surprise
when we comprehend the state of opinion at the period as to the
obligatory force of written texts, apart from all consideration
of the Source whence they were derived. 
    When the kings of France had brought their long struggle for
supremacy to a successful close, an epoch which may be placed
roughly at the accession of the branch of Valois-Angouleme to the
throne, the situation of the French jurists was peculiar and
continued to be so down to the outbreak of the revolution. On the
one hand, they formed the best instructed and nearly the most
powerful class in the nation. They had made good their footing as
a privileged order by the side of the feudal aristocracy, and
they had assured their influence by an organisation which
distributed their profession over France in great chartered
corporations possessing large defined powers and still larger
indefinite claims. In all the qualities of the advocate, the
judge, and the legislator, they far excelled their compeers
throughout Europe. Their juridical tact, their ease of
expression, their fine sense of analogy and harmony, and (if they
may be judged by the highest names among them) their passionate
devotion to their conceptions of justice, were as remarkable as
the singular variety of talent which they included, a variety
covering the whole ground between the opposite poles of Cujas and
Montesquieu, of D'Aguesseau and Dumoulin. But, on the other hand,
the system of laws which they had to administer stood in striking
contrast with the habits of mind which they had cultivated. The
France which had been in great part constituted by their efforts
was smitten with the curse of an anomalous and dissonant
jurisprudence beyond every other country in Europe. One great
division ran through the country and separated it into Pays du
Droit Ecrit and Pays du Droit Coutumier; the first acknowledging
the written Roman law as the basis of their jurisprudence, the
last admitting it only so far as it supplied general forms of
expression, and courses of juridical reasoning which were
reconcileable with the local usages. The sections thus formed
were again variously subdivided. In the Pays du Droit Coutumier
province differed from province, county from county, municipality
from municipality, in the nature of its customs. In the Pays du
Droit Ecrit the stratum of feudal rules which overlay the Roman
law was of the most miscellaneous composition. No such confusion
as this ever existed in England. In Germany it did exist, but was
too much in harmony with the deep political and religious
divisions of the country to be lamented or even felt. It was the
special peculiarity of France that an extraordinary diversity of
laws continued without sensible alteration while the central
authority of the monarchy was constantly strengthening itself,
while rapid approaches were being made to complete administrative
unity, and while a fervid national spirit had been developed
among the people. The contrast was one which fructified in many
serious results, and among them we must rank the effect which it
produced on the minds of the French lawyer. Their speculative
opinions and their intellectual bias were in the strongest
opposition to their interests and professional habits. With the
keenest sense and the fullest recognition of those perfections of
jurisprudence which consist in simplicity and uniformity, they
believed, or seemed to believe, that the vices which actually
infested French law were ineradicable: and in practice they often
resisted the reformation of abuses with an obstinacy which was
not shown by many among their less enlightened countrymen. But
there was a way to reconcile these contradictions. They became
passionate enthusiasts for Natural Law. The Law of Nature
overleapt all provincial and municipal boundaries; it disregarded
all distinctions between noble and burgess, between burgess and
peasant; it gave the most exalted place to lucidity, simplicity
and system; but it committed its devotees to no specific
improvement, and did not directly threaten any venerable or
lucrative technicality. Natural law may be said to have become
the common law of France, or, at all events, the admission of its
dignity and claims was the one tenet which all French
practitioners alike subscribed to. The language of the
prae-revolutionary jurists in its eulogy is singularly
unqualified, and it is remarkable that the writers on the
Customs, who often made it their duty to speak disparagingly of
the pure Roman law, speak even more fervidly of Nature and her
rules than the civilians who professed an exclusive respect for
the Digest and the Code. Dumoulin, the highest of all authorities
on old French Customary Law, has some extravagant passages on the
Law of Nature; and his panegyrics have a peculiar rhetorical turn
which indicated a considerable departure from the caution of the
Roman jurisconsults. The hypothesis of a Natural Law had become
not so much a theory guiding practice as an article of
speculative faith, and accordingly we shall find that, in the
transformation which it more recently underwent, its weakest
parts rose to the level of its strongest in the esteem of its
supporters. 
    The eighteenth century was half over when the most critical
period in the history of Natural Law was reached. Had the
discussion of the theory and of its consequences continued to be
exclusively the employment of the legal profession, there would
possibly have been an abatement of the respect which it
commanded; for by this time the Esprit des Lois had appeared.
Bearing in some exaggerations the marks of the excessive violence
with which its author's mind had recoiled from assumptions
usually suffered to pass without scrutiny, vet showing in some
ambiguities the traces of a desire to compromise with existing
prejudice, the book of Montesquieu, with all its defects, still
proceeded on that Historical Method before which the Law of
Nature has never maintained its footing for an instant. Its
influence on thought ought to have been as great as its general
popularity; but, in fact, it was never allowed time to put it
forth, for the counter-hypothesis which it seemed destined to
destroy passed suddenly from the forum to the street, and became
the key-note of controversies far more exciting than are ever
agitated in the courts or the schools. The person who launched it
on its new career was that remarkable man who, without learning,
with few virtues, and with no strength of character, has
nevertheless stamped himself ineffaceably on history by the force
of a vivid imagination, and by the help of a genuine and burning
love for his fellow-men, for which much will always have to be
forgiven him. We have never seen in our own generation -- indeed
the world has not seen more than once or twice in all the course
of history -- a literature which has exercised such prodigious
influence over the minds of men, over every cast and shade of
intellect, as that which emanated from Rousseau between 1749 and
1762. It was the first attempt to re-erect the edifice of human
belief after the purely iconoclastic efforts commenced by Bayle,
and in part by our own Locke, and consummated by Voltaire; and
besides the superiority which every constructive effort will
always enjoy over one that is merely destructive, it possessed
the immense advantage of appearing amid an all but universal
scepticism as to the soundness of all foregone knowledge in
matters speculative. Now, in all the speculations of Rousseau,
the central figure, whether arrayed in an English dress as the
signatory of a social compact, or simply stripped naked of all
historical qualities, is uniformly Man, in a supposed state of
nature. Every law or institution which would misbeseem this
imaginary being under these ideal circumstances is to be
condemned as having lapsed from an original perfection; every
transformation of society which would give it a closer
resemblance to the world over which the creature of Nature
reigned, is admirable and worthy to be effected at any apparent
cost. The theory is still that of the Roman lawyers, for in the
phantasmagoria with which the Natural Condition is peopled, every
feature and characteristic eludes the mind except the simplicity
and harmony which possessed such charms for the jurisconsult; but
the theory is, as it were, turned upside down. It is not the Law
of Nature, but the State of Nature, which is now the primary
subject of contemplation. The Roman had conceived that by careful
observation of existing institutions parts of them could be
singled out which either exhibited already, or could by judicious
purification be made to exhibit, the vestiges of that reign of
nature whose reality he faintly affirmed. Rousseau's belief was
that a perfect social order could be evolved from the unassisted
consideration of the natural state, a social order wholly
irrespective of the actual condition of the world and wholly
unlike it. The great difference between the views is that one
bitterly and broadly condemns the present for its unlikeness to
the ideal past; while the other, assuming the present to be as
necessary as the past, does not affect to disregard or censure
it. It is not worth our while to analyse with any particularity
that philosophy of politics, art, education, ethics, and social
relation which was constructed on the basis of a state of nature.
It still possesses singular fascination for the looser thinkers
of every country, and is no doubt the parent, more or less
remote, of almost all the prepossessions which impede the
employment of the Historical Method of inquiry, but its discredit
with the higher minds of our day is deep enough to astonish those
who are familiar with the extraordinary vitality of speculative
error. Perhaps the question most frequently asked nowadays is not
what is the value of these opinions, but what were the causes
which gave them such overshadowing prominence a hundred years
ago. The answer is, I conceive, a simple one. The study which in
the last century would best have corrected the misapprehensions
into which an exclusive attention to legal antiquities is apt to
betray was the study of religion. But Greek religion, as then
understood, was dissipated in imaginative myths. The Oriental
religions, if noticed at all, appeared to be lost in vain
cosmogonies. There was but one body of primitive records which
was worth studying -- the early history of the Jews. But resort
to this was prevented by the prejudices of the time. One of the
few characteristics which the school of Rousseau had in common
with the school of Voltaire was an utter disdain of all religious
antiquities; and, more than all, of those of the Hebrew race. It
is well known that it was a point of honour with the reasoners of
that day to assume not merely that the institutions called after
Moses were not divinely dictated, nor even that they were
codified at a later date than that attributed to them, but that
they and the entire Pentateuch were a gratuitous forgery,
executed after the return from the Captivity. Debarred,
therefore, from one chief security against speculative delusion,
the philosophers of France, in their eagerness to escape from
what they deemed a superstition of the priests, flung themselves
headlong into a superstition of the lawyer. 
    But though the philosophy founded on the hypothesis of a
state of nature has fallen low in general esteem, in so far as it
is looked upon under its coarser and more palpable aspect, it
does not follow that in its subtler disguises it has lost
plausibility, popularity, or power. I believe, as I have said,
that it is still the great antagonist of the Historical Method;
and whenever (religious objections apart) any mind is seen to
resist or contemn that mode of investigation, it will generally
be found under the influence of a prejudice or vicious bias
traceable to a conscious or unconscious reliance on a
non-historic, natural, condition of society or the individual. It
is chiefly, however, by allying themselves with political and
social tendencies that the doctrines of Nature and her law have
preserved their energy. Some of these tendencies they have
stimulated, other they have actually created, to a great number
they have given expression and form. They visibly enter largely
into the ideas which constantly radiate from France over the
civilised world, and thus become part of the general body of
thought by which its civilisation is modified. The value of the
influence which they thus exercise over the fortunes of the race
is of course one of the points which our age debates most warmly,
and it is beside the purpose of this treatise to discuss it.
Looking back, however, to the period at which the theory of the
state of nature acquired the maximum of political importance,
there are few who will deny that it helped most powerfully to
bring about the grosser disappointments of which the first French
Revolution was fertile. It gave birth, or intense stimulus, to
the vices of mental habit all but universal at the time, disdain
of positive law, impatience of experience, and the preference of
a priori to all other reasoning. In proportion too as this
philosophy fixes its grasp on minds which have thought less than
others and fortified themselves with smaller observation, its
tendency is to become distinctly anarchical. It is surprising to
note how many of the Sophismes Anarchiques which Dumont published
for Bentham, and which embody Bentham's exposure of errors
distinctively French, are derived from the Roman hypothesis in
its French transformation, and are unintelligible unless referred
to it. On this point too it is a curious exercise to consult the
Moniteur during the principal eras of the Revolution. The appeals
to the Law and State of Nature become thicker as the times grow
darker. They are comparatively rare in the Constituent Assembly;
they are much more frequent in the Legislative; in the
Convention, amid the din of debate on conspiracy and war, they
are perpetual. 
    There is a single example which very strikingly illustrates
the effects of the theory of natural law on modern society, and
indicates how very far are those effects from being exhausted.
There cannot, I conceive, be any question that to the assumption
of a Law Natural we owe the doctrine of the fundamental equality
of human beings. That "all men are equal" is one of a large
number of legal propositions which, in progress of time, have
become political. The Roman jurisconsults of the Antonine era lay
down that "omnes homines natura aequales sunt," but in their eyes
this is a strictly juridical axiom. They intend to affirm that,
under the hypothetical Law of Nature, and in so far as positive
law approximates to it, the arbitrary distinctions which the
Roman Civil Law maintained between classes of persons cease to
have a legal existence. The rule was one of considerable
importance to the Roman practitioner, who required to be reminded
that, wherever Roman jurisprudence was assumed to conform itself
exactly to the code of Nature, there was no difference in the
contemplation of the Roman tribunals between citizen and
foreigner, between freeman and slave, between Agnate and Cognate.
The jurisconsults who thus expressed themselves most certainly
never intended to censure the social arrangements under which
civil law fell somewhat short of its speculative type; nor did
they apparently believe that the world would ever see human
society completely assimilated to the economy of nature. But when
the doctrine of human equality makes its appearance in a modern
dress it has evidently clothed itself with a new shade of
meaning. Where the Roman jurisconsult had written "aequales
sunt," meaning exactly what he said, the modern civilian wrote
"all men are equal" in the sense of "all men ought to be equal."
The peculiar Roman idea that natural law coexisted with civil law
and gradually absorbed it, had evidently been lost sight of, or
had become unintelligible, and the words which had at most
conveyed a theory conceding the origin, composition, and
development of human institutions, were beginning to express the
sense of a great standing wrong suffered by mankind. As early as
the beginning of the fourteenth century, the current language
conceding the birthstate of men, though visibly intended to be
identical with that of Ulpian and his contemporaries, has assumed
an altogether different form and meaning. The preamble to the
celebrated ordinance of King Louis Hutin enfranchising the serfs
of the royal domains would have sounded strangely to Roman ears.
"Whereas, according to natural law, everybody ought to be born
free; and by some usages and customs which, from long antiquity,
have been introduced and kept until now in our realm, and
peradventure by reason of the misdeeds of their predecessors,
many persons of our common people have fallen into servitude,
therefore, We, etc." This is the enunciation not of a legal rule
but of a political dogma; and from this time the equality of men
is spoken of by the French lawyers just as if it were a political
truth which happened to have been preserved among the archives of
their science. Like all other deductions from the hypothesis of a
Law Natural, and like the belief itself in a Law of Nature, it
was languidly assented to and suffered to have little influence
on opinion and practice until it passed out of the possession of
the lawyers into that of the literary men of the eighteenth
century and of the public which sat at their feet. With them it
became the most distinct tenet of their creed, and was even
regarded as a summary of all the others. It is probable, however,
that the power which it ultimately acquired over the events of
1789 was not entirely owing to its popularity in France, for in
the middle of the century it passed over to America. The American
lawyers of the time, and particularly those of Virginia, appear
to have possessed a stock of knowledge which differed chiefly
from that of their English contemporaries in including much which
could only have been derived from the legal literature of
continental Europe. A very few glances at the writings of
Jefferson will show how strongly his mind was affected by the
semi-juridical, semipopular opinions which were fashionable in
France, and we cannot doubt that it was sympathy with the
peculiar ideas of the French jurists which led him and the other
colonial lawyers who guided the course of events in America to
join the specially French assumption that "all men are born
equal" with the assumption, more familiar to Englishmen, that
"all men are born free," in the very first lines of their
Declaration of Independence. The passage was one of great
importance to the history of the doctrine before us. The American
lawyers, in thus prominently and emphatically affirming the
fundamental equality of human beings, gave an impulse to
political movements in their own country, and in a less degree in
Great Britain, which is far from having yet spent itself; but
besides this they returned the dogma they had adopted to its home
in France, endowed with vastly greater energy and enjoying much
greater claims on general reception and respect. Even the more
cautious politicians of the first Constituent Assembly repeated
Ulpian's proposition as if it at once commended itself to the
instincts and intuitions of mankind; and of all the "principles
of 1789" it is the one which has been least strenuously assailed,
which has most thoroughly leavened modern opinion, and which
promises to modify most deeply the constitution of societies and
the politics of states. 
    The grandest function of the Law of Nature was discharged in
giving birth to modern International Law and to the modern Law of
War, but this part of its effects must here be dismissed with
consideration very unequal to its importance. 
    Among the postulates which form the foundation of
International Law, or of so much of it as retains the figure
which it received from its original architects, there are two or
three of pre-eminent importance. The first of all is expressed in
the position that there is a determinable Law of Nature. Grotius
and his successor took the assumption directly from the Romans,
but they differed widely from the Roman jurisconsults and from
each other in their ideas as to the mode of determination. The
ambition of almost every Publicist who has flourished since the
revival of letters has been to provide new and more manageable
definitions of Nature and of her law, and it is indisputable that
the conception in passing through the long series of writers on
Public Law has gathered round it a large accretion, consisting of
fragments of ideas derived from nearly every theory of ethic
which has in its turn taken possession of the schools. Yet it is
a remarkable proof of the essentially historical character of the
conception that, after all the efforts which have been made to
evolve the code of nature from the necessary characteristic of
the natural state, so much of the result is just what it would
have been if men had been satisfied to adopt the dicta of the
Roman lawyers without questioning or reviewing them. Setting
aside the Conventional or Treaty Law of Nations, it is surprising
how large a part of the system is made up of pure Roman law.
Wherever there is a doctrine of the jurisconsult affirmed by them
to be in harmony with the Jus Gentium, the publicists have found
a reason for borrowing it, however plainly it may bear the marks
of a distinctively Roman origin. We may observe too that the
derivative theories are afflicted with the weakness of the
primary notion. In the majority of the Publicists, the mode of
thought is still "mixed." In studying these writers, the great
difficulty is always to discover whether they are discussing law
or morality -- whether the state of international relations they
describe is actual or ideal -- whether they lay down that which
is, or that which, in their opinion, ought to be. 
    The assumption that Natural Law is binding on states inter se
is the next in rank of those which underlie International Law. A
series of assertions or admissions of this principle may be
traced up to the very infancy of modern juridical science, and at
first sight it seems a direct inference from the teaching of the
Romans. The civil condition of society being distinguished from
the natural by the fact that in the first there is a distinct
author of law, while in the last there is none, it appears as if
the moment a number of units were acknowledged to obey no common
sovereign or political superior they were thrown back on the
ulterior behests of the Law Natural. States are such units; the
hypothesis of their independence excludes the notion of a common
lawgiver, and draws with it, therefore, according to a certain
range of ideas, the notion of subjection to the primeval order of
nature. The alternative is to consider independent communities as
not related to each other by any law, but this condition of
lawlessness is exactly the vacuum which the Nature of the
jurisconsults abhorred. There is certainly apparent reason for
thinking that if the mind of a Roman lawyer rested on any sphere
from which civil law was banished, it would instantly fill the
void with the ordinances of Nature. It is never safe, however, to
assume that conclusions, however certain and immediate in our own
eyes, were actually drawn at any period of history. No passage
has ever been adduced from the remains of Roman law which, in my
judgment, proves the jurisconsults to have believed natural law
to have obligatory force between independent commonwealths; and
we cannot but see that to citizens of the Roman empire who
regarded their sovereign's dominions as conterminous with
civilisation, the equal subjection of states to the Law of
Nature, if contemplated at all, must have seemed at most an
extreme result of curious speculation. The truth appears to be
that modern International Law, undoubted as is its descent from
Roman law, is only connected with it by an irregular filiation.
The early modern interpreters of the jurisprudence of Rome,
misconceiving the meaning of Jus Gentium, assumed without
hesitation that the Romans had bequeathed to them a system of
rules for the adjustment of international transactions. This "Law
of Nations" was at first an authority which had formidable
competitors to strive with, and the condition of Europe was long
such as to preclude its universal reception. Gradually, however,
the western world arranged itself in a form more favourable to
the theory of the civilians; circumstances destroyed the credit
of rival doctrines; and at last, at a peculiarly felicitous
conjuncture, Ayala and Grotius were able to obtain for it the
enthusiastic assent of Europe, an assent which has been over and
over again renewed in every variety of solemn engagement. The
great men to whom its triumph is chiefly owing attempted, it need
scarcely be said, to place it on an entirely new basis, and it is
unquestionable that in the course of this displacement they
altered much of its structure, though far less of it than is
commonly supposed. Having adopted from the Antonine jurisconsults
the position that the Jus Gentium and the Jus Naturae were
identical, Grotius, with his immediate predecessors and his
immediate successors, attributed to the Law of Nature an
authority which would never perhaps have been claimed for it, if
"Law of Nations" had not in that age been an ambiguous
expression. They laid down unreservedly that Natural Law is the
code of states, and thus put in operation a process which has
continued almost down to our own day, the process of engrafting
on the international system rules which are supposed to have been
evolved from the unassisted contemplation of the conception of
Nature. There is too one consequence of immense practical
importance to mankind which, though not unknown during the early
modern history of Europe, was never clearly or universally
acknowledged till the doctrines of the Grotian school had
prevailed. If the society of nations is governed by Natural Law,
the atoms which compose it must be absolutely equal. Men under
the sceptre of Nature are all equal, and accordingly
commonwealths are equal if the international state be one of
nature. The proposition that independent communities, however
different in size and power, are all equal in the view of the law
of nations, has largely contributed to the happiness of mankind,
though it is constantly threatened by the political tendencies of
each successive age. It is a doctrine which probably would never
have obtained a secure footing at all if international Law had
not been entirely derived from the majestic claims of Nature by
the Publicists who wrote after the revival of letters. 
    On the whole, however, it is astonishing, as I have observed
before, how small a proportion the additions made to
international Law since Grotius's day bear to the ingredients
which have been simply taken from the most ancient stratum of the
Roman Jus Gentium. Acquisition of territory has always been the
great spur of national ambition, and the rules which govern this
acquisition, together with the rules which moderate the wars in
which it too frequently results, are merely transcribed from the
part of the Roman law which treats of the modes of acquiring
property jure gentium. These modes of acquisition were obtained
by the elder jurisconsults, as I have attempted to explain, by
abstracting a common ingredient from the usages observed to
prevail among the various tribes surrounding Rome; and, having
been classed on account of their origin in the "law common to all
nations," they were thought by the later lawyers to fit in, on
the score of their simplicity, with the more recent conception of
a Law Natural. They thus made their way into the modern Law of
Nations, and the result is that those parts of the international
system which refer to dominion, its nature, its limitations, the
modes of acquiring and securing it, are pure Roman Property Law
-- so much, that is to say, of the Roman Law of Property as the
Antonine jurisconsults imagined to exhibit a certain congruity
with the natural state. In order that these chapters of
International Law may be capable of application, it is necessary
that sovereigns should be related to each other like the members
of a group of Roman proprietors. This is another of the
postulates which lie at the threshold of the International Code,
and it is also one which could not possibly have been subscribed
to during the first centuries of modern European history.. It is
resolvable into the double proposition that "sovereignty is
territorial," i.e. that it is always associated with the
proprietorship of a limited portion of the earth's surface, and
that "sovereigns inter se are to be deemed not paramount, but
absolute, owners of the state's territory."
    Many contemporary writers on International Law tacitly assume
that the doctrines of their system, founded on principles of
equity and common sense, were capable of being readily reasoned
out in every stage of modern civilisation. But this assumption,
while it conceals some real defects of the international theory,
is altogether untenable, so far as regards a large part of modern
history. It is not true that the authority of the Jus Gentium in
the concerns of nations was always uncontradicted; on the
contrary, it had to struggle long against the claims of several
competing systems. It is again not true that the territorial
character of sovereignty was always recognised, for long after
the dissolution of the Roman dominion the minds of men were under
the empire of ideas irreconcileable with such a conception. An
old order of things, and of views founded on it, had to decay --
a new Europe, and an apparatus of new notions congenial to it,
had to spring up before two of the chiefest postulates of
International Law could be universally conceded. 
    It is a consideration well worthy to be kept in view that
during a large part of what we usually term modern history no
such conception was entertained as that of "territorial
sovereignty." Sovereignty was not associated with dominion over a
portion or subdivision of the earth. The world had lain for so
many centuries under the shadow of Imperial Rome as to have
forgotten that distribution of the vast spaces comprised in the
empire which had once parcelled them out into a number of
independent commonwealths, claiming immunity from extrinsic
interference, and pretending to equality of national rights.
After the subsidence of the barbarian irruptions, the notion of
sovereignty that prevailed seems to have been twofold. On the one
hand it assumed the form of what may be called
"tribe-sovereignty." The Franks, the Burgundians, the Vandals,
the Lombards, and Visigoths were masters, of course, of the
territories which they occupied, and to which some of them have
given a geographical appellation; but they based no claim of
right upon the fact of territorial possession, and indeed
attached no importance to it whatever. They appear to have
retained the traditions which they brought with them from the
forest and the steppe, and to have still been in their own view a
patriarchal society a nomad horde, merely encamped for the time
upon the soil which afforded them sustenance. Part of Transalpine
Gaul, with part of Germany, had now become the country de facto
occupied by the Franks -- it was France; but the Merovingian line
of chieftains, the descendants of Clovis, were not Kings of
France, they were Kings of the Franks. The alternative to this
peculiar notion of sovereignty appears to have been  -- and this
is the important point -- the idea of universal dominion. The
moment a monarch departed from the special relation of chief to
clansmen, and became solicitous, for purposes of his Own, to
invest himself with a novel form of sovereignty, the only
precedent which suggested itself for his adoption was the
domination of the Emperors of Rome. To parody a common quotation,
he became "aut Caesar aut nullus." Either he pretended to the
full prerogative of the Byzantine Emperor, or he had no political
status whatever. In our own age, when a new dynasty is desirous
of obliterating the prescriptive title of a deposed line of
sovereigns, it takes its designation from the people, instead of
the territory. Thus we have Emperors and Kings of the French, and
a King of the Belgians. At the period of which we have been
speaking, under similar circumstances a different alternative
presented itself. The Chieftain who would no longer call himself
King of the tribe must claim to be Emperor of the world. Thus,
when the hereditary Mayors of the Palace had ceased to compromise
with the monarchs they had long since virtually dethroned, they
soon became unwilling to call themselves Kings of the Franks, a
title which belonged to the displaced Merovings; but they could
not style themselves Kings of France, for such a designation,
though apparently not unknown, was not a title of dignity.
Accordingly they came forward as aspirants to universal empire.
Their motive has been greatly misapprehended. It has been taken
for granted by recent French writers that Charlemagne was far
before his age, quite as much in the character of his designs as
in the energy with which he prosecuted them. Whether it be true
or not that anybody is at any time before his age, it is
certainly true that Charlemagne, in aiming at an unlimited
dominion, was emphatically taking the only course which the
characteristic ideas of his age permitted him to follow. Of his
intellectual eminence there cannot be a question, but it is
proved by his acts and not by his theory. 
    These singularities of view were not altered on the partition
of the inheritance of Charlemagne among his three grandsons.
Charles the Bald, Lewis, and Lothair were still theoretically --
if it be proper to use the word -- Emperors of Rome. Just as the
Caesars of the Eastern and Western Empires had each been de jure
emperor of the whole world, with defacto control over half of it,
so the three Carlovingians appear to have considered their power
as limited, but their title as unqualified. The same speculative
universality of sovereignty continued to be associated with the
Imperial throne after the second division on the death of Charles
the Fat, and, indeed, was never thoroughly dissociated from it so
long as the empire of Germany lasted. Territorial sovereignty --
the view which connects sovereignty with the possession of a
limited portion of the earth's surface -- was distinctly an
offshoot, though a tardy one, of feudalism. This might have been
expected a priori, for it was feudalism which for the first time
linked personal duties, and by consequence personal rights, to
the ownership of land. Whatever be the proper view of its origin
and legal nature, the best mode of vividly picturing to ourselves
the feudal organisation is to begin with the basis, to consider
the relation of the tenant to the patch of soil which created and
limited his services -- and then to mount up, through narrowing
circles of super-feudation, till we approximate to the apex of
the system. Where that summit exactly was during the later
portion of the dark ages it is not easy to decide. Probably,
wherever the conception of tribe sovereignty had really decayed,
the topmost point was always assigned to the supposed successor
of the Caesars of the West. But before long, when the actual
sphere of Imperial authority had immensely contracted, and when
the emperors had concentrated the scanty remains of their power
upon Germany and North Italy, the highest feudal superiors in all
the outlying portions of the former Carlovingian empire found
themselves practically without a supreme head. Gradually they
habituated themselves to the new situation, and the fact of
immunity put at last out of sight the theory of dependence; but
there are many symptoms that this change was not quite easily
accomplished; and, indeed, to the impression that in the nature
of things there must necessarily be a culminating domination
somewhere, we may, no doubt, refer the increasing tendency to
attribute secular superiority to the See of Rome. The completion
of the first stage in the revolution of opinion is marked, of
course, by the accession of the Capetian dynasty in France. When
the feudal prince of a limited territory surrounding Paris began,
from the accident of his uniting an unusual number of
suzerainties in his own person, to call himself King of France,
he became king in quite a new sense, a sovereign standing in the
same relation to the soil of France as the baron to his estate,
the tenant to his freehold. The precedent, however, was as
influential as it was novel, and the form of the monarchy in
France had visible effects in hastening changes which were
elsewhere proceeding in the same direction. The kingship of our
Anglo-Saxon regal houses was midway between the chieftainship of
a tribe and a territorial supremacy,. but the superiority of the
Norman monarchs, imitated from that of the King of France, was
distinctly a territorial sovereignty. Every subsequent dominion
which was established or consolidated was formed on the later
model. Spain, Naples, and the principalities founded on the ruins
of municipal freedom in Italy, were all under rulers whose
sovereignty was territorial. Few things, I may add, are more
curious than the gradual lapse of the Venetians from one view to
the other. At the commencement of its foreign conquests, the
republic regarded itself as an antitype of the Roman
commonwealth, governing a number of subject provinces. Move a
century onwards, and you find that it wishes to be looked upon as
a corporate sovereign, claiming the rights of a feudal suzerain
over its possessions in Italy and the AEgean. 
    During the period through which the popular ideas on the
subject of sovereignty were undergoing this remarkable change,
the system which stood in the place of what we now call
International Law was heterogeneous in form and inconsistent in
the principles to which it appealed. Over so much of Europe as
was comprised in the Romano-German empire, the connection of the
confederate states was regulated by the complex and as yet
incomplete mechanism of the Imperial constitution; and,
surprising as it may seem to us, it was a favourite notion of
German lawyers that the relations of commonwealths, whether
inside or outside the empire, ought to be regulated not by the
Jus Gentium, but by the pure Roman jurisprudence, of which Caesar
was still the centre. This doctrine was less confidently
repudiated in the outlying countries than we might have supposed
antecedently; but, substantially, through the rest of Europe
feudal subordinations furnished a substitute for a public law;
and when those were undetermined or ambiguous, there lay behind,
in theory at least, a supreme regulating force in the authority
of the head of the Church. It is certain, however, that both
feudal and ecclesiastical influences were rapidly decaying during
the fifteenth, and even the fourteenth century,. and if we
closely examine the current pretexts of wars, and the avowed
motives of alliances, it will be seen that, step by step with the
displacement of the old principles, the views afterwards
harmonised and consolidated by Ayala and Grotius were making
considerable progress, though it was silent and but slow. Whether
the fusion of all the sources of authority would ultimately have
evolved a system of international relations, and whether that
system would have exhibited material differences from the fabric
of Grotius, is not now possible to decide, for as a matter of
fact the Reformation annihilated all its potential elements
except one. Beginning in Germany it divided the princes of the
empire by a gulf too broad to be bridged over by the Imperial
supremacy, even if the Imperial superior had stood neutral. He,
however, was forced to take colour with the church against the
reformer; the Pope was, as a matter of course, in the same
predicament; and thus the two authorities to whom belonged the
office of mediation between combatants became themselves the
chiefs of one great faction in the schism of the nations.
Feudalism, already enfeebled and discredited as a principle of
public relations, furnished no bond whatever which was stable
enough to countervail the alliances of religion. In a condition,
therefore, of public law which was little less than chaotic,
those views of a state system to which the Roman jurisconsults
were supposed to have given their sanction alone remained
standing. The shape, the symmetry and the prominence which they
assumed in the hands of Grotius are known to every educated man;
but the great marvel of the Treatise "De Jure Belli et Pacis,"
was its rapid, complete, and universal success. The horrors of
the Thirty Years' War, the boundless terror and pity which the
unbridled license of the soldiery was exciting, must, no doubt,
be taken to explain that success in some measure, but they do not
wholly account for it. Very little penetration into the ideas of
that age is required to convince one that if the ground plan of
the international edifice which was sketched in the great book of
Grotius had not appeared to be theoretically perfect, it would
have been discarded by jurists and neglected by statesmen and
soldiers. 
    It is obvious that the speculative perfection of the Grotian
system is intimately connected with that conception of
territorial sovereignty which we have been discussing. The theory
of International Law assumes that commonwealths are, relatively
to each other, in a state of nature; but the component atoms of a
natural society must, by the fundamental assumption, be insulated
and independent of each other. If there be a higher power
connecting them, however slightly and occasionally by the claim
of common supremacy, the very conception of a common superior
introduces the notion of positive law, and excludes the idea of a
law natural. It follows, therefore, that if the universal
suzerainty of an Imperial head had been admitted even in bare
theory, the labours of Grotius would have been idle. Nor is this
the only point of junction between modern public law and those
views of sovereignty of which I have endeavoured to describe the
development. I have said that there are entire departments of
international jurisprudence which consist of the Roman Law of
Property. What then is the inference? It is, that if there had
been no such change as I have described in the estimate of
sovereignty -- if sovereignty had not been associated with the
proprietorship of a limited portion of the earth, had not, in
other words, become territorial -- three parts of the Grotian
theory would have been incapable of application. 

