





CHAPTER XV



INTRODUCTION OF THE EDISON ELECTRIC LIGHT



IN the previous chapter on the invention of a system,

the narrative has been carried along for several

years of activity up to the verge of the successful and

commercial application of Edison's ideas and devices

for incandescent electric lighting. The story of any

one year in this period, if treated chronologically,

would branch off in a great many different directions,

some going back to earlier work, others forward to

arts not yet within the general survey; and the effect

of such treatment would be confusing. In like manner

the development of the Edison lighting system

followed several concurrent, simultaneous lines of

advance; and an effort was therefore made in the

last chapter to give a rapid glance over the whole

movement, embracing a term of nearly five years, and

including in its scope both the Old World and the

New. What is necessary to the completeness of the

story at this stage is not to recapitulate, but to take

up some of the loose ends of threads woven in and

follow them through until the clear and comprehensive

picture of events can be seen.



Some things it would be difficult to reproduce in

any picture of the art and the times. One of the

greatest delusions of the public in regard to any

notable invention is the belief that the world is waiting

for it with open arms and an eager welcome. The

exact contrary is the truth. There is not a single new

art or device the world has ever enjoyed of which

it can be said that it was given an immediate and

enthusiastic reception. The way of the inventor is

hard. He can sometimes raise capital to help him

in working out his crude conceptions, but even then

it is frequently done at a distressful cost of personal

surrender. When the result is achieved the invention

makes its appeal on the score of economy of

material or of effort; and then "labor" often awaits

with crushing and tyrannical spirit to smash the

apparatus or forbid its very use. Where both capital

and labor are agreed that the object is worthy of

encouragement, there is the supreme indifference of

the public to overcome, and the stubborn resistance

of pre-existing devices to combat. The years of hardship

and struggle are thus prolonged, the chagrin of

poverty and neglect too frequently embitters the

inventor's scanty bread; and one great spirit after

another has succumbed to the defeat beyond which

lay the procrastinated triumph so dearly earned.

Even in America, where the adoption of improvements

and innovations is regarded as so prompt and

sure, and where the huge tolls of the Patent Office

and the courts bear witness to the ceaseless efforts

of the inventor, it is impossible to deny the sad truth

that unconsciously society discourages invention

rather than invites it. Possibly our national optimism

as revealed in invention--the seeking a higher

good--needs some check. Possibly the leaders would

travel too fast and too far on the road to perfection

if conservatism did not also play its salutary part

in insisting that the procession move forward as a

whole.



Edison and his electric light were happily more

fortunate than other men and inventions, in the relative

cordiality of the reception given them. The

merit was too obvious to remain unrecognized.

Nevertheless, it was through intense hostility and

opposition that the young art made its way, pushed

forward by Edison's own strong personality and by

his unbounded, unwavering faith in the ultimate success

of his system. It may seem strange that great

effort was required to introduce a light so manifestly

convenient, safe, agreeable, and advantageous,

but the facts are matter of record; and to-day the

recollection of some of the episodes brings a fierce

glitter into the eye and keen indignation into the

voice of the man who has come so victoriously through

it all.



It was not a fact at any time that the public was

opposed to the idea of the electric light. On the contrary,

the conditions for its acceptance had been ripening

fast. Yet the very vogue of the electric arc light

made harder the arrival of the incandescent. As a

new illuminant for the streets, the arc had become

familiar, either as a direct substitute for the low gas

lamp along the sidewalk curb, or as a novel form of

moonlight, raised in groups at the top of lofty towers

often a hundred and fifty feet high. Some of these

lights were already in use for large indoor spaces,

although the size of the unit, the deadly pressure of

the current, and the sputtering sparks from the carbons

made them highly objectionable for such purposes.

A number of parent arc-lighting companies

were in existence, and a great many local companies

had been called into being under franchises for

commercial business and to execute regular city contracts

for street lighting. In this manner a good deal of

capital and the energies of many prominent men in

politics and business had been rallied distinctively

to the support of arc lighting. Under the inventive

leadership of such brilliant men as Brush, Thomson,

Weston, and Van Depoele--there were scores of

others--the industry had made considerable progress

and the art had been firmly established. Here lurked,

however, very vigorous elements of opposition, for

Edison predicted from the start the superiority of the

small electric unit of light, and devoted himself

exclusively to its perfection and introduction. It can

be readily seen that this situation made it all the more

difficult for the Edison system to secure the large

sums of money needed for its exploitation, and to

obtain new franchises or city ordinances as a public

utility. Thus in a curious manner the modern art

of electric lighting was in a very true sense divided

against itself, with intense rivalries and jealousies

which were none the less real because they were but

temporary and occurred in a field where ultimate

union of forces was inevitable. For a long period the

arc was dominant and supreme in the lighting branch

of the electrical industries, in all respects, whether as

to investment, employees, income, and profits, or in

respect to the manufacturing side. When the great

National Electric Light Association was formed in

1885, its organizers were the captains of arc lighting,

and not a single Edison company or licensee could be

found in its ranks, or dared to solicit membership.

The Edison companies, soon numbering about three

hundred, formed their own association--still maintained

as a separate and useful body--and the lines

were tensely drawn in a way that made it none too

easy for the Edison service to advance, or for an

impartial man to remain friendly with both sides.

But the growing popularity of incandescent lighting,

the flexibility and safety of the system, the ease with

which other electric devices for heat, power, etc.,

could be put indiscriminately on the same circuits

with the lamps, in due course rendered the old attitude

of opposition obviously foolish and untenable.

The United States Census Office statistics of 1902

show that the income from incandescent lighting by

central stations had by that time become over 52

per cent. of the total, while that from arc lighting

was less than 29; and electric-power service due to

the ease with which motors could be introduced on

incandescent circuits brought in 15 per cent. more.

Hence twenty years after the first Edison stations

were established the methods they involved could be

fairly credited with no less than 67 per cent. of all

central-station income in the country, and the

proportion has grown since then. It will be readily

understood that under these conditions the modern

lighting company supplies to its customers both

incandescent and arc lighting, frequently from the same

dynamo-electric machinery as a source of current;

and that the old feud as between the rival systems

has died out. In fact, for some years past the presidents

of the National Electric Light Association have

been chosen almost exclusively from among the managers

of the great Edison lighting companies in the

leading cities.



The other strong opposition to the incandescent

light came from the gas industry. There also the

most bitter feeling was shown. The gas manager did

not like the arc light, but it interfered only with his

street service, which was not his largest source of

income by any means. What did arouse his ire and

indignation was to find this new opponent, the little

incandescent lamp, pushing boldly into the field of

interior lighting, claiming it on a great variety of

grounds of superiority, and calmly ignoring the question

of price, because it was so much better. Newspaper

records and the pages of the technical papers

of the day show to what an extent prejudice and

passion were stirred up and the astounding degree

to which the opposition to the new light was carried.



Here again was given a most convincing demonstration

of the truth that such an addition to the

resources of mankind always carries with it unsuspected

benefits even for its enemies. In two distinct

directions the gas art was immediately helped by

Edison's work. The competition was most salutary

in the stimulus it gave to improvements in processes

for making, distributing, and using gas, so that while

vast economies have been effected at the gas works,

the customer has had an infinitely better light for

less money. In the second place, the coming of the

incandescent light raised the standard of illumination

in such a manner that more gas than ever was

wanted in order to satisfy the popular demand for

brightness and brilliancy both indoors and on the

street. The result of the operation of these two

forces acting upon it wholly from without, and from

a rival it was desired to crush, has been to increase

enormously the production and use of gas in the last

twenty-five years. It is true that the income of the

central stations is now over $300,000,000 a year, and

that isolated-plant lighting represents also a large

amount of diverted business; but as just shown, it

would obviously be unfair to regard all this as a loss

from the standpoint of gas. It is in great measure

due to new sources of income developed by electricity

for itself.



A retrospective survey shows that had the men in

control of the American gas-lighting art, in 1880, been

sufficiently far-sighted, and had they taken a broader

view of the situation, they might easily have remained

dominant in the whole field of artificial lighting by

securing the ownership of the patents and devices of

the new industry. Apparently not a single step of

that kind was undertaken, nor probably was there

a gas manager who would have agreed with Edison in

the opinion written down by him at the time in little

note-book No. 184, that gas properties were having

conferred on them an enhanced earning capacity.

It was doubtless fortunate and providential for the

electric-lighting art that in its state of immature

development it did not fall into the hands of men who

were opposed to its growth, and would not have sought

its technical perfection. It was allowed to carve out

its own career, and thus escaped the fate that is

supposed to have attended other great inventions--of

being bought up merely for purposes of suppression.

There is a vague popular notion that this happens to

the public loss; but the truth is that no discovery of

any real value is ever entirely lost. It may be retarded;

but that is all. In the case of the gas companies

and the incandescent light, many of them to

whom it was in the early days as great an irritant as

a red flag to a bull, emulated the performance of that

animal and spent a great deal of money and energy

in bellowing and throwing up dirt in the effort to

destroy the hated enemy. This was not long nor

universally the spirit shown; and to-day in hundreds

of cities the electric and gas properties are united

under the one management, which does not find it

impossible to push in a friendly and progressive way

the use of both illuminants. The most conspicuous

example of this identity of interest is given in New

York itself.



So much for the early opposition, of which there

was plenty. But it may be questioned whether

inertia is not equally to be dreaded with active ill-will.

Nothing is more difficult in the world than to get a

good many hundreds of thousands or millions of people

to do something they have never done before. A

very real difficulty in the introduction of his lamp

and lighting system by Edison lay in the absolute

ignorance of the public at large, not only as to its

merits, but as to the very appearance of the light,

Some few thousand people had gone out to Menlo

Park, and had there seen the lamps in operation at

the laboratory or on the hillsides, but they were an

insignificant proportion of the inhabitants of the

United States. Of course, a great many accounts

were written and read, but while genuine interest was

aroused it was necessarily apathetic. A newspaper

description or a magazine article may be admirably

complete in itself, with illustrations, but until some

personal experience is had of the thing described it

does not convey a perfect mental picture, nor can it

always make the desire active and insistent. Generally,

people wait to have the new thing brought to

them; and hence, as in the case of the Edison light,

an educational campaign of a practical nature is a

fundamental condition of success.



Another serious difficulty confronting Edison and

his associates was that nowhere in the world were

there to be purchased any of the appliances necessary

for the use of the lighting system. Edison had resolved

from the very first that the initial central

station embodying his various ideas should be installed

in New York City, where he could superintend

the installation personally, and then watch the operation.

Plans to that end were now rapidly maturing;

but there would be needed among many other things

--every one of them new and novel--dynamos,

switchboards, regulators, pressure and current

indicators, fixtures in great variety, incandescent

lamps, meters, sockets, small switches, underground

conductors, junction-boxes, service-boxes, manhole-

boxes, connectors, and even specially made wire.

Now, not one of these miscellaneous things was in

existence; not an outsider was sufficiently informed

about such devices to make them on order, except

perhaps the special wire. Edison therefore started

first of all a lamp factory in one of the buildings at

Menlo Park, equipped it with novel machinery and

apparatus, and began to instruct men, boys, and girls,

as they could be enlisted, in the absolutely new art,

putting Mr. Upton in charge.



With regard to the conditions attendant upon the

manufacture of the lamps, Edison says: "When we

first started the electric light we had to have a factory

for manufacturing lamps. As the Edison Light Company

did not seem disposed to go into manufacturing,

we started a small lamp factory at Menlo Park with

what money I could raise from my other inventions

and royalties, and some assistance. The lamps at

that time were costing about $1.25 each to make, so

I said to the company: `If you will give me a contract

during the life of the patents, I will make all

the lamps required by the company and deliver them

for forty cents.' The company jumped at the chance

of this offer, and a contract was drawn up. We then

bought at a receiver's sale at Harrison, New Jersey,

a very large brick factory building which had been

used as an oil-cloth works. We got it at a great bargain,

and only paid a small sum down, and the balance

on mortgage. We moved the lamp works from

Menlo Park to Harrison. The first year the lamps

cost us about $1.10 each. We sold them for forty

cents; but there were only about twenty or thirty

thousand of them. The next year they cost us about

seventy cents, and we sold them for forty. There

were a good many, and we lost more money the

second year than the first. The third year I succeeded

in getting up machinery and in changing the

processes, until it got down so that they cost somewhere

around fifty cents. I still sold them for forty

cents, and lost more money that year than any other,

because the sales were increasing rapidly. The

fourth year I got it down to thirty-seven cents, and

I made all the money up in one year that I had lost

previously. I finally got it down to twenty-two

cents, and sold them for forty cents; and they were

made by the million. Whereupon the Wall Street

people thought it was a very lucrative business, so

they concluded they would like to have it, and

bought us out.



"One of the incidents which caused a very great

cheapening was that, when we started, one of the

important processes had to be done by experts. This

was the sealing on of the part carrying the filament

into the globe, which was rather a delicate operation

in those days, and required several months of training

before any one could seal in a fair number of parts

in a day. When we got to the point where we employed

eighty of these experts they formed a union;

and knowing it was impossible to manufacture lamps

without them, they became very insolent. One instance

was that the son of one of these experts was

employed in the office, and when he was told to do

anything would not do it, or would give an insolent

reply. He was discharged, whereupon the union

notified us that unless the boy was taken back the

whole body would go out. It got so bad that the

manager came to me and said he could not stand it

any longer; something had got to be done. They

were not only more surly; they were diminishing the

output, and it became impossible to manage the

works. He got me enthused on the subject, so I

started in to see if it were not possible to do that

operation by machinery. After feeling around for

some days I got a clew how to do it. I then put men

on it I could trust, and made the preliminary machinery.

That seemed to work pretty well. I then

made another machine which did the work nicely.

I then made a third machine, and would bring in

yard men, ordinary laborers, etc., and when I could

get these men to put the parts together as well as

the trained experts, in an hour, I considered the

machine complete. I then went secretly to work

and made thirty of the machines. Up in the top

loft of the factory we stored those machines, and at

night we put up the benches and got everything all

ready. Then we discharged the office-boy. Then

the union went out. It has been out ever since.



"When we formed the works at Harrison we divided

the interests into one hundred shares or parts

at $100 par. One of the boys was hard up after a

time, and sold two shares to Bob Cutting. Up to

that time we had never paid anything; but we got

around to the point where the board declared a

dividend every Saturday night. We had never declared

a dividend when Cutting bought his shares,

and after getting his dividends for three weeks in

succession, he called up on the telephone and wanted

to know what kind of a concern this was that paid

a weekly dividend. The works sold for $1,085,000."



Incidentally it may be noted, as illustrative of the

problems brought to Edison, that while he had the

factory at Harrison an importer in the Chinese trade

went to him and wanted a dynamo to be run by

hand power. The importer explained that in China

human labor was cheaper than steam power. Edison

devised a machine to answer the purpose, and put

long spokes on it, fitted it up, and shipped it to

China. He has not, however, heard of it since.



For making the dynamos Edison secured, as noted

in the preceding chapter, the Roach Iron Works on

Goerck Street, New York, and this was also equipped.

A building was rented on Washington Street, where

machinery and tools were put in specially designed

for making the underground tube conductors and

their various paraphernalia; and the faithful John

Kruesi was given charge of that branch of production.

To Sigmund Bergmann, who had worked previously

with Edison on telephone apparatus and phonographs,

and was already making Edison specialties

in a small way in a loft on Wooster Street, New York,

was assigned the task of constructing sockets, fixtures,

meters, safety fuses, and numerous other

details.



Thus, broadly, the manufacturing end of the problem

of introduction was cared for. In the early part

of 1881 the Edison Electric Light Company leased

the old Bishop mansion at 65 Fifth Avenue, close to

Fourteenth Street, for its headquarters and show-

rooms. This was one of the finest homes in the

city of that period, and its acquisition was a premonitory

sign of the surrender of the famous residential

avenue to commerce. The company needed

not only offices, but, even more, such an interior as

would display to advantage the new light in everyday

use; and this house with its liberal lines, spacious

halls, lofty ceilings, wide parlors, and graceful, winding

stairway was ideal for the purpose. In fact, in

undergoing this violent change, it did not cease to

be a home in the real sense, for to this day many

an Edison veteran's pulse is quickened by some

chance reference to "65," where through many years

the work of development by a loyal and devoted

band of workers was centred. Here Edison and a

few of his assistants from Menlo Park installed

immediately in the basement a small generating plant,

at first with a gas-engine which was not successful,

and then with a Hampson high-speed engine and

boiler, constituting a complete isolated plant. The

building was wired from top to bottom, and equipped

with all the appliances of the art. The experience

with the little gas-engine was rather startling. "At

an early period at `65' we decided," says Edison, "to

light it up with the Edison system, and put a gas-

engine in the cellar, using city gas. One day it was

not going very well, and I went down to the man in

charge and got exploring around. Finally I opened

the pedestal--a storehouse for tools, etc. We had

an open lamp, and when we opened the pedestal, it

blew the doors off, and blew out the windows, and

knocked me down, and the other man."



For the next four or five years "65" was a veritable

beehive, day and night. The routine was very much

the same as that at the laboratory, in its utter neglect

of the clock. The evenings were not only devoted to

the continuance of regular business, but the house

was thrown open to the public until late at night,

never closing before ten o'clock, so as to give everybody

who wished an opportunity to see that great

novelty of the time--the incandescent light--whose

fame had meanwhile been spreading all over the

globe. The first year, 1881, was naturally that which

witnessed the greatest rush of visitors; and the

building hardly ever closed its doors till midnight.

During the day business was carried on under great

stress, and Mr. Insull has described how Edison was

to be found there trying to lead the life of a man of

affairs in the conventional garb of polite society,

instead of pursuing inventions and researches in his

laboratory. But the disagreeable ordeal could not

be dodged. After the experience Edison could never

again be tempted to quit his laboratory and work

for any length of time; but in this instance there were

some advantages attached to the sacrifice, for the

crowds of lion-hunters and people seeking business

arrangements would only have gone out to Menlo

Park; while, on the other hand, the great plans for

lighting New York demanded very close personal

attention on the spot.



As it was, not only Edison, but all the company's

directors, officers, and employees, were kept busy

exhibiting and explaining the light. To the public

of that day, when the highest known form of house

illuminant was gas, the incandescent lamp, with its

ability to burn in any position, its lack of heat so

that you could put your hand on the brilliant glass

globe; the absence of any vitiating effect on the

atmosphere, the obvious safety from fire; the curious

fact that you needed no matches to light it, and

that it was under absolute control from a distance--

these and many other features came as a distinct

revelation and marvel, while promising so much

additional comfort, convenience, and beauty in the

home, that inspection was almost invariably followed

by a request for installation.



The camaraderie that existed at this time was very

democratic, for all were workers in a common cause;

all were enthusiastic believers in the doctrine they

proclaimed, and hoped to profit by the opening up

of the new art. Often at night, in the small hours,

all would adjourn for refreshments to a famous resort

nearby, to discuss the events of to-day and to-

morrow, full of incident and excitement. The easy

relationship of the time is neatly sketched by Edison

in a humorous complaint as to his inability to keep

his own cigars: "When at `65' I used to have in my

desk a box of cigars. I would go to the box four or

five times to get a cigar, but after it got circulated

about the building, everybody would come to get

my cigars, so that the box would only last about a

day and a half. I was telling a gentleman one day

that I could not keep a cigar. Even if I locked them

up in my desk they would break it open. He suggested

to me that he had a friend over on Eighth

Avenue who made a superior grade of cigars, and

who would show them a trick. He said he would

have some of them made up with hair and old paper,

and I could put them in without a word and see the

result. I thought no more about the matter. He

came in two or three months after, and said: `How

did that cigar business work?' I didn't remember

anything about it. On coming to investigate, it

appeared that the box of cigars had been delivered

and had been put in my desk, and I had smoked

them all! I was too busy on other things to notice."



It was no uncommon sight to see in the parlors in

the evening John Pierpont Morgan, Norvin Green,

Grosvenor P. Lowrey, Henry Villard, Robert L.

Cutting, Edward D. Adams, J. Hood Wright, E. G.

Fabbri, R. M. Galloway, and other men prominent in

city life, many of them stock-holders and directors;

all interested in doing this educational work. Thousands

of persons thus came--bankers, brokers, lawyers,

editors, and reporters, prominent business men,

electricians, insurance experts, under whose searching

and intelligent inquiries the facts were elicited, and

general admiration was soon won for the system,

which in advance had solved so many new problems.

Edison himself was in universal request and the subject

of much adulation, but altogether too busy and

modest to be spoiled by it. Once in a while he felt

it his duty to go over the ground with scientific

visitors, many of whom were from abroad, and discuss

questions which were not simply those of technique,

but related to newer phenomena, such as the

action of carbon, the nature and effects of high

vacua; the principles of electrical subdivision; the

value of insulation, and many others which, unfortu-

nate to say, remain as esoteric now as they were then,

ever fruitful themes of controversy.



Speaking of those days or nights, Edison says:

"Years ago one of the great violinists was Remenyi.

After his performances were over he used to come

down to `65' and talk economics, philosophy, moral

science, and everything else. He was highly educated

and had great mental capacity. He would talk with

me, but I never asked him to bring his violin. One

night he came with his violin, about twelve o'clock.

I had a library at the top of the house, and Remenyi

came up there. He was in a genial humor, and played

the violin for me for about two hours--$2000 worth.

The front doors were closed, and he walked up and

down the room as he played. After that, every time

he came to New York he used to call at `65' late at

night with his violin. If we were not there, he could

come down to the slums at Goerck Street, and would

play for an hour or two and talk philosophy. I would

talk for the benefit of his music. Henry E. Dixey,

then at the height of his `Adonis' popularity, would

come in in those days, after theatre hours, and would

entertain us with stories--1882-84. Another visitor

who used to give us a good deal of amusement and

pleasure was Captain Shaw, the head of the London

Fire Brigade. He was good company. He would

go out among the fire-laddies and have a great time.

One time Robert Lincoln and Anson Stager, of the

Western Union, interested in the electric light, came

on to make some arrangement with Major Eaton,

President of the Edison Electric Light Company.

They came to `65' in the afternoon, and Lincoln com-

menced telling stories--like his father. They told

stories all the afternoon, and that night they left for

Chicago. When they got to Cleveland, it dawned

upon them that they had not done any business, so

they had to come back on the next train to New York

to transact it. They were interested in the Chicago

Edison Company, now one of the largest of the

systems in the world. Speaking of telling stories, I

once got telling a man stories at the Harrison lamp

factory, in the yard, as he was leaving. It was

winter, and he was all in furs. I had nothing on to

protect me against the cold. I told him one story

after the other--six of them. Then I got pleurisy,

and had to be shipped to Florida for cure."



The organization of the Edison Electric Light Company

went back to 1878; but up to the time of leasing

65 Fifth Avenue it had not been engaged in actual

business. It had merely enjoyed the delights of

anxious anticipation, and the perilous pleasure of

backing Edison's experiments. Now active exploitation

was required. Dr. Norvin Green, the well-known

President of the Western Union Telegraph Company,

was president also of the Edison Company, but the

pressing nature of his regular duties left him no

leisure for such close responsible management as was

now required. Early in 1881 Mr. Grosvenor P.

Lowrey, after consultation with Mr. Edison, prevailed

upon Major S. B. Eaton, the leading member

of a very prominent law firm in New York, to

accept the position of vice-president and general

manager of the company, in which, as also in some

of the subsidiary Edison companies, and as presi-

dent, he continued actively and energetically for

nearly four years, a critical, formative period in which

the solidity of the foundation laid is attested by the

magnitude and splendor of the superstructure.



The fact that Edison conferred at this point with

Mr. Lowrey should, perhaps, be explained in justice

to the distinguished lawyer, who for so many years

was the close friend of the inventor, and the chief

counsel in all the tremendous litigation that followed

the effort to enforce and validate the Edison patents.

As in England Mr. Edison was fortunate in securing

the legal assistance of Sir Richard Webster, afterward

Lord Chief Justice of England, so in America it

counted greatly in his favor to enjoy the advocacy

of such a man as Lowrey, prominent among the famous

leaders of the New York bar. Born in Massachusetts,

Mr. Lowrey, in his earlier days of straitened

circumstances, was accustomed to defray some portion

of his educational expenses by teaching music

in the Berkshire villages, and by a curious coincidence

one of his pupils was F. L. Pope, later Edison's

partner for a time. Lowrey went West to "Bleeding

Kansas" with the first Governor, Reeder, and both

were active participants in the exciting scenes of the

"Free State" war until driven away in 1856, like

many other free-soilers, by the acts of the "Border

Ruffian" legislature. Returning East, Mr. Lowrey

took up practice in New York, soon becoming eminent

in his profession, and upon the accession of William

Orton to the presidency of the Western Union Telegraph

Company in 1866, he was appointed its general

counsel, the duties of which post he discharged for

fifteen years. One of the great cases in which he

thus took a leading and distinguished part was that

of the quadruplex telegraph; and later he acted as

legal adviser to Henry Villard in his numerous

grandiose enterprises. Lowrey thus came to know

Edison, to conceive an intense admiration for him,

and to believe in his ability at a time when others

could not detect the fire of genius smouldering beneath

the modest exterior of a gaunt young operator

slowly "finding himself." It will be seen that Mr

Lowrey was in a peculiarly advantageous position to

make his convictions about Edison felt, so that it was

he and his friends who rallied quickly to the new

banner of discovery, and lent to the inventor the aid

that came at a critical period. In this connection it

may be well to quote an article that appeared at the

time of Mr. Lowrey's death, in 1893: "One of the

most important services which Mr. Lowrey has ever

performed was in furnishing and procuring the necessary

financial backing for Thomas A. Edison in bringing

out and perfecting his system of incandescent

lighting. With characteristic pertinacity, Mr. Lowrey

stood by the inventor through thick and thin, in spite

of doubt, discouragement, and ridicule, until at last

success crowned his efforts. In all the litigation

which has resulted from the wide-spread infringements

of the Edison patents, Mr. Lowrey has ever

borne the burden and heat of the day, and perhaps

in no other field has he so personally distinguished

himself as in the successful advocacy of the claims of

Edison to the invention of the incandescent lamp

and everything "hereunto pertaining."



This was the man of whom Edison had necessarily

to make a confidant and adviser, and who supplied

other things besides the legal direction and financial

alliance, by his knowledge of the world and of affairs.

There were many vital things to be done in the

exploitation of the system that Edison simply could

not and would not do; but in Lowrey's savoir faire,

ready wit and humor, chivalry of devotion, graceful

eloquence, and admirable equipoise of judgment were

all the qualities that the occasion demanded and that

met the exigencies.



We are indebted to Mr. Insull for a graphic sketch

of Edison at this period, and of the conditions under

which work was done and progress was made: "I do

not think I had any understanding with Edison

when I first went with him as to my duties. I did

whatever he told me, and looked after all kinds of

affairs, from buying his clothes to financing his business.

I used to open the correspondence and answer

it all, sometimes signing Edison's name with my

initial, and sometimes signing my own name. If the

latter course was pursued, and I was addressing a

stranger, I would sign as Edison's private secretary.

I held his power of attorney, and signed his checks.

It was seldom that Edison signed a letter or check at

this time. If he wanted personally to send a

communication to anybody, if it was one of his close

associates, it would probably be a pencil memorandum

signed `Edison.' I was a shorthand writer, but seldom

took down from Edison's dictation, unless it was

on some technical subject that I did not understand.

I would go over the correspondence with Edison,

sometimes making a marginal note in shorthand, and

sometimes Edison would make his own notes on letters,

and I would be expected to clean up the correspondence

with Edison's laconic comments as a guide

as to the character of answer to make. It was a

very common thing for Edison to write the words

`Yes' or `No,' and this would be all I had on which

to base my answer. Edison marginalized documents

extensively. He had a wonderful ability in pointing

out the weak points of an agreement or a balance-sheet,

all the while protesting he was no lawyer or accountant;

and his views were expressed in very few words,

but in a characteristic and emphatic manner.



"The first few months I was with Edison he spent

most of the time in the office at 65 Fifth Avenue.

Then there was a great deal of trouble with the life

of the lamps there, and he disappeared from the

office and spent his time largely at Menlo Park. At

another time there was a great deal of trouble

with some of the details of construction of the

dynamos, and Edison spent a lot of time at Goerck

Street, which had been rapidly equipped with the

idea of turning out bi-polar dynamo-electric machines,

direct-connected to the engine, the first of

which went to Paris and London, while the next were

installed in the old Pearl Street station of the Edison

Electric Illuminating Company of New York, just

south of Fulton Street, on the west side of the street.

Edison devoted a great deal of his time to the

engineering work in connection with the laying out of

the first incandescent electric-lighting system in New

York. Apparently at that time--between the end

of 1881 and spring of 1882--the most serious work

was the manufacture and installation of underground

conductors in this territory. These conductors

were manufactured by the Electric Tube

Company, which Edison controlled in a shop at 65

Washington Street, run by John Kruesi. Half-round

copper conductors were used, kept in place relatively

to each other and in the tube, first of all by a heavy

piece of cardboard, and later on by a rope; and then

put in a twenty-foot iron pipe; and a combination of

asphaltum and linseed oil was forced into the pipe for

the insulation. I remember as a coincidence that the

building was only twenty feet wide. These lengths

of conductors were twenty feet six inches long, as

the half-round coppers extended three inches beyond

the drag-ends of the lengths of pipe; and in one of

the operations we used to take the length of tubing

out of the window in order to turn it around. I was

elected secretary of the Electric Tube Company, and

was expected to look after its finance; and it was in

this position that my long intimacy with John Kruesi

started."



At this juncture a large part of the correspondence

referred very naturally to electric lighting, embodying

requests for all kinds of information, catalogues,

prices, terms, etc.; and all these letters were turned

over to the lighting company by Edison for attention.

The company was soon swamped with propositions for

sale of territorial rights and with other negotiations,

and some of these were accompanied by the offer of

very large sums of money. It was the beginning of

the electric-light furor which soon rose to sensational

heights. Had the company accepted the cash offers

from various localities, it could have gathered several

millions of dollars at once into its treasury; but this

was not at all in accord with Mr. Edison's idea, which

was to prove by actual experience the commercial

value of the system, and then to license central-

station companies in large cities and towns, the parent

company taking a percentage of their capital for the

license under the Edison patents, and contracting

also for the supply of apparatus, lamps, etc. This

left the remainder of the country open for the cash

sale of plants wherever requested. His counsels prevailed,

and the wisdom of the policy adopted was seen

in the swift establishment of Edison companies in

centres of population both great and small, whose

business has ever been a constant and growing source

of income for the parent manufacturing interests.



From first to last Edison has been an exponent and

advocate of the central-station idea of distribution

now so familiar to the public mind, but still very far

from being carried out to its logical conclusion. In

this instance, demands for isolated plants for lighting

factories, mills, mines, hotels, etc., began to pour in,

and something had to be done with them. This was

a class of plant which the inquirers desired to purchase

outright and operate themselves, usually because

of remoteness from any possible source of

general supply of current. It had not been Edison's

intention to cater to this class of customer until his

broad central-station plan had been worked out, and

he has always discouraged the isolated plant within

the limits of urban circuits; but this demand was so

insistent it could not be denied, and it was deemed

desirable to comply with it at once, especially as it

was seen that the steady call for supplies and renewals

would benefit the new Edison manufacturing

plants. After a very short trial, it was found necessary

to create a separate organization for this branch

of the industry, leaving the Edison Electric Light

Company to continue under the original plan of

operation as a parent, patent-holding and licensing

company. Accordingly a new and distinct corporation

was formed called the Edison Company for

Isolated Lighting, to which was issued a special

license to sell and operate plants of a self-contained

character. As a matter of fact such work began in

advance of almost every other kind. A small plant

using the paper-carbon filament lamps was furnished

by Edison at the earnest solicitation of Mr. Henry

Villard for the steamship Columbia, in 1879, and it

is amusing to note that Mr. Upton carried the lamps

himself to the ship, very tenderly and jealously, like

fresh eggs, in a market-garden basket. The installation

was most successful. Another pioneer plant was

that equipped and started in January, 1881, for

Hinds & Ketcham, a New York firm of lithographers

and color printers, who had previously been able to

work only by day, owing to difficulties in color-

printing by artificial light. A year later they said:

"It is the best substitute for daylight we have ever

known, and almost as cheap."



Mr. Edison himself describes various instances in

which the demand for isolated plants had to be met:

"One night at `65,' " he says, "James Gordon Bennett

came in. We were very anxious to get into a printing

establishment. I had caused a printer's composing

case to be set up with the idea that if we could get

editors and publishers in to see it, we should show

them the advantages of the electric light. So ultimately

Mr. Bennett came, and after seeing the whole

operation of everything, he ordered Mr. Howland,

general manager of the Herald, to light the newspaper

offices up at once with electricity."



Another instance of the same kind deals with the

introduction of the light for purely social purposes:

"While at 65 Fifth Avenue," remarks Mr. Edison,

"I got to know Christian Herter, then the largest

decorator in the United States. He was a highly

intellectual man, and I loved to talk to him. He was

always railing against the rich people, for whom he

did work, for their poor taste. One day Mr. W. H.

Vanderbilt came to `65,' saw the light, and decided

that he would have his new house lighted with it.

This was one of the big `box houses' on upper Fifth

Avenue. He put the whole matter in the hands of

his son-in-law, Mr. H. McK. Twombly, who was then

in charge of the telephone department of the Western

Union. Twombly closed the contract with us for a

plant. Mr. Herter was doing the decoration, and it

was extraordinarily fine. After a while we got the

engines and boilers and wires all done, and the lights

in position, before the house was quite finished, and

thought we would have an exhibit of the light. About

eight o'clock in the evening we lit up, and it was very

good. Mr. Vanderbilt and his wife and some of his

daughters came in, and were there a few minutes

when a fire occurred. The large picture-gallery was

lined with silk cloth interwoven with fine metallic

thread. In some manner two wires had got crossed

with this tinsel, which became red-hot, and the whole

mass was soon afire. I knew what was the matter,

and ordered them to run down and shut off. It had

not burst into flame, and died out immediately.

Mrs. Vanderbilt became hysterical, and wanted to

know where it came from. We told her we had the

plant in the cellar, and when she learned we had a

boiler there she said she would not occupy the house.

She would not live over a boiler. We had to take

the whole installation out. The houses afterward

went onto the New York Edison system."



The art was, however, very crude and raw, and as

there were no artisans in existence as mechanics or

electricians who had any knowledge of the practice,

there was inconceivable difficulty in getting such

isolated plants installed, as well as wiring the buildings

in the district to be covered by the first central

station in New York. A night school was, therefore,

founded at Fifth Avenue, and was put in charge of

Mr. E. H. Johnson, fresh from his successes in England.

The most available men for the purpose were,

of course, those who had been accustomed to wiring

for the simpler electrical systems then in vogue--

telephones, district-messenger calls, burglar alarms,

house annunciators, etc., and a number of these

"wiremen" were engaged and instructed patiently in

the rudiments of the new art by means of a blackboard

and oral lessons. Students from the technical

schools and colleges were also eager recruits, for here

was something that promised a career, and one that was

especially alluring to youth because of its novelty.

These beginners were also instructed in general

engineering problems under the guidance of Mr. C. L.

Clarke, who was brought in from the Menlo Park

laboratory to assume charge of the engineering part

of the company's affairs. Many of these pioneer

students and workmen became afterward large and

successful contractors, or have filled positions of

distinction as managers and superintendents of central

stations. Possibly the electrical industry may not

now attract as much adventurous genius as it did

then, for automobiles, aeronautics, and other new arts

have come to the front in a quarter of a century to

enlist the enthusiasm of a younger generation of

mercurial spirits; but it is certain that at the period

of which we write, Edison himself, still under thirty-

five, was the centre of an extraordinary group of men,

full of effervescing and aspiring talent, to which he

gave glorious opportunity.



A very novel literary feature of the work was the

issuance of a bulletin devoted entirely to the Edison

lighting propaganda. Nowadays the "house organ,"

as it is called, has become a very hackneyed feature

of industrial development, confusing in its variety and

volume, and a somewhat doubtful adjunct to a highly

perfected, widely circulating periodical technical press.

But at that time, 1882, the Bulletin of the Edison

Electric Light Company, published in ordinary 12mo

form, was distinctly new in advertising and possibly

unique, as it is difficult to find anything that compared

with it. The Bulletin was carried on for some

years, until its necessity was removed by the development

of other opportunities for reaching the public;

and its pages serve now as a vivid and lively picture

of the period to which its record applies. The first

issue, of January 12, 1882, was only four pages, but

it dealt with the question of insurance; plants at

Santiago, Chili, and Rio de Janeiro; the European

Company with 3,500,000 francs subscribed; the work

in Paris, London, Strasburg, and Moscow; the laying

of over six miles of street mains in New York; a patent

decision in favor of Edison; and the size of safety

catch wire. By April of 1882, the Bulletin had

attained the respectable size of sixteen pages; and in

December it was a portly magazine of forty-eight.

Every item bears testimony to the rapid progress

being made; and by the end of 1882 it is seen that

no fewer than 153 isolated Edison plants had been

installed in the United States alone, with a capacity

of 29,192 lamps. Moreover, the New York central

station had gone into operation, starting at 3 P.M. on

September 4, and at the close of 1882 it was lighting

225 houses wired for about 5000 lamps. This epochal

story will be told in the next chapter. Most interesting

are the Bulletin notes from England, especially

in regard to the brilliant exhibition given by Mr.

E. H. Johnson at the Crystal Palace, Sydenham,

visited by the Duke and Duchess of Edinburgh, twice

by the Dukes of Westminster and Sutherland, by

three hundred members of the Gas Institute, and by

innumerable delegations from cities, boroughs, etc.

Describing this before the Royal Society of Arts,

Sir W. H. Preece, F.R.S., remarked: "Many unkind

things have been said of Mr. Edison and his promises;

perhaps no one has been severer in this direction than

myself. It is some gratification for me to announce

my belief that he has at last solved the problem he

set himself to solve, and to be able to describe to the

Society the way in which he has solved it." Before

the exhibition closed it was visited by the Prince and

Princess of Wales--now the deceased Edward VII.

and the Dowager Queen Alexandra--and the Princess

received from Mr. Johnson as a souvenir a tiny

electric chandelier fashioned like a bouquet of fern

leaves and flowers, the buds being some of the first

miniature incandescent lamps ever made.



The first item in the first Bulletin dealt with the

"Fire Question," and all through the successive issues

runs a series of significant items on the same subject.

Many of them are aimed at gas, and there are several

grim summaries of death and fires due to gas-

leaks or explosions. A tendency existed at the time

to assume that electricity was altogether safe, while

its opponents, predicating their attacks on arc-lighting

casualties, insisted it was most dangerous. Edison's

problem in educating the public was rather difficult,

for while his low-pressure, direct-current system has

always been absolutely without danger to life, there

has also been the undeniable fact that escaping

electricity might cause a fire just as a leaky water-

pipe can flood a house. The important question had

arisen, therefore, of satisfying the fire underwriters

as to the safety of the system. He had foreseen that

there would be an absolute necessity for special devices

to prevent fires from occurring by reason of

any excess of current flowing in any circuit; and several

of his earliest detail lighting inventions deal with

this subject. The insurance underwriters of New

York and other parts of the country gave a great deal

of time and study to the question through their most

expert representatives, with the aid of Edison and

his associates, other electric-light companies

cooperating; and the knowledge thus gained was

embodied in insurance rules to govern wiring for electric

lights, formulated during the latter part of 1881,

adopted by the New York Board of Fire Underwriters,

January 12, 1882, and subsequently endorsed

by other boards in the various insurance

districts. Under temporary rulings, however, a vast

amount of work had already been done, but it was

obvious that as the industry grew there would be

less and less possibility of supervision except through

such regulations, insisting upon the use of the best

devices and methods. Indeed, the direct superintendence

soon became unnecessary, owing to the increasing

knowledge and greater skill acquired by the

installing staff; and this system of education was

notably improved by a manual written by Mr. Edison

himself. Copies of this brochure are as scarce to-day

as First Folio Shakespeares, and command prices

equal to those of other American first editions. The

little book is the only known incursion of its author

into literature, if we except the brief articles he has

written for technical papers and for the magazines.

It contained what was at once a full, elaborate,

and terse explanation of a complete isolated plant,

with diagrams of various methods of connection and

operation, and a carefully detailed description of

every individual part, its functions and its

characteristics. The remarkable success of those early

years was indeed only achieved by following up with

Chinese exactness the minute and intimate methods

insisted upon by Edison as to the use of the apparatus

and devices employed. It was a curious example of

establishing standard practice while changing with

kaleidoscopic rapidity all the elements involved. He

was true to an ideal as to the pole-star, but was

incessantly making improvements in every direction.

With an iconoclasm that has often seemed ruthless

and brutal he did not hesitate to sacrifice older devices

the moment a new one came in sight that embodied

a real advance in securing effective results. The process

is heroic but costly. Nobody ever had a bigger

scrap-heap than Edison; but who dare proclaim the

process intrinsically wasteful if the losses occur in

the initial stages, and the economies in all the later

ones?



With Edison in this introduction of his lighting

system the method was ruthless, but not reckless.

At an early stage of the commercial development a

standardizing committee was formed, consisting of

the heads of all the departments, and to this body

was intrusted the task of testing and criticising all

existing and proposed devices, as well as of considering

the suggestions and complaints of workmen offered

from time to time. This procedure was fruitful in

two principal results--the education of the whole executive

force in the technical details of the system; and

a constant improvement in the quality of the Edison

installations; both contributing to the rapid growth

of the industry.



For many years Goerck Street played an important

part in Edison's affairs, being the centre of all his

manufacture of heavy machinery. But it was not

in a desirable neighborhood, and owing to the rapid

growth of the business soon became disadvantageous

for other reasons. Edison tells of his frequent visits

to the shops at night, with the escort of "Jim" Russell,

a well-known detective, who knew all the denizens

of the place: "We used to go out at night to a little,

low place, an all-night house--eight feet wide and

twenty-two feet long--where we got a lunch at two or

three o'clock in the morning. It was the toughest kind

of restaurant ever seen. For the clam chowder they

used the same four clams during the whole season,

and the average number of flies per pie was seven.

This was by actual count."



As to the shops and the locality: "The street was

lined with rather old buildings and poor tenements.

We had not much frontage. As our business increased

enormously, our quarters became too small,

so we saw the district Tammany leader and asked

him if we could not store castings and other things

on the sidewalk. He gave us permission--told us

to go ahead, and he would see it was all right. The

only thing he required for this was that when a man

was sent with a note from him asking us to give him

a job, he was to be put on. We had a hand-laborer

foreman--`Big Jim'--a very powerful Irishman, who

could lift above half a ton. When one of the Tammany

aspirants appeared, he was told to go right to

work at $1.50 per day. The next day he was told

off to lift a certain piece, and if the man could not

lift it he was discharged. That made the Tammany

man all safe. Jim could pick the piece up easily.

The other man could not, and so we let him out.

Finally the Tammany leader called a halt, as we were

running big engine lathes out on the sidewalk, and

he was afraid we were carrying it a little too far.

The lathes were worked right out in the street, and

belted through the windows of the shop."



At last it became necessary to move from Goerck

Street, and Mr. Edison gives a very interesting account

of the incidents in connection with the transfer

of the plant to Schenectady, New York: "After our

works at Goerck Street got too small, we had labor

troubles also. It seems I had rather a socialistic

strain in me, and I raised the pay of the workmen

twenty-five cents an hour above the prevailing rate

of wages, whereupon Hoe & Company, our near

neighbors, complained at our doing this. I said I

thought it was all right. But the men, having got

a little more wages, thought they would try coercion

and get a little more, as we were considered soft

marks. Whereupon they struck at a time that was

critical. However, we were short of money for pay-

rolls; and we concluded it might not be so bad after

all, as it would give us a couple of weeks to catch up.

So when the men went out they appointed a committee

to meet us; but for two weeks they could not

find us, so they became somewhat more anxious than

we were. Finally they said they would like to go

back. We said all right, and back they went. It

was quite a novelty to the men not to be able to find

us when they wanted to; and they didn't relish it at

all.



"What with these troubles and the lack of room,

we decided to find a factory elsewhere, and decided

to try the locomotive works up at Schenectady. It

seems that the people there had had a falling out

among themselves, and one of the directors had

started opposition works; but before he had completed

all the buildings and put in machinery some

compromise was made, and the works were for sale.

We bought them very reasonably and moved everything

there. These works were owned by me and

my assistants until sold to the Edison General Electric

Company. At one time we employed several thousand

men; and since then the works have been

greatly expanded.



"At these new works our orders were far in excess

of our capital to handle the business, and both Mr.

Insull and I were afraid we might get into trouble

for lack of money. Mr. Insull was then my business

manager, running the whole thing; and, therefore,

when Mr. Henry Villard and his syndicate offered to

buy us out, we concluded it was better to be sure

than be sorry; so we sold out for a large sum. Villard

was a very aggressive man with big ideas, but I

could never quite understand him. He had no sense

of humor. I remember one time we were going up

on the Hudson River boat to inspect the works, and

with us was Mr. Henderson, our chief engineer, who

was certainly the best raconteur of funny stories I

ever knew. We sat at the tail-end of the boat, and

he started in to tell funny stories. Villard could not

see a single point, and scarcely laughed at all; and

Henderson became so disconcerted he had to give it

up. It was the same way with Gould. In the early

telegraph days I remember going with him to see

Mackay in "The Impecunious Country Editor." It

was very funny, full of amusing and absurd situations;

but Gould never smiled once."



The formation of the Edison General Electric Company

involved the consolidation of the immediate

Edison manufacturing interests in electric light and

power, with a capitalization of $12,000,000, now a

relatively modest sum; but in those days the amount

was large, and the combination caused a great deal

of newspaper comment as to such a coinage of brain

power. The next step came with the creation of the

great General Electric Company of to-day, a combination

of the Edison, Thomson-Houston, and Brush

lighting interests in manufacture, which to this day

maintains the ever-growing plants at Harrison, Lynn,

and Schenectady, and there employs from twenty to

twenty-five thousand people.


