





CHAPTER XXV



THE LABORATORY AT ORANGE AND THE STAFF



A LIVING interrogation-point and a born investigator

from childhood, Edison has never been without

a laboratory of some kind for upward of half a

century.



In youthful years, as already described in this book,

he became ardently interested in chemistry, and even

at the early age of twelve felt the necessity for a

special nook of his own, where he could satisfy his

unconvinced mind of the correctness or inaccuracy

of statements and experiments contained in the few

technical books then at his command.



Ordinarily he was like other normal lads of his age

--full of boyish, hearty enjoyments--but withal possessed

of an unquenchable spirit of inquiry and an

insatiable desire for knowledge. Being blessed with

a wise and discerning mother, his aspirations were

encouraged; and he was allowed a corner in her

cellar. It is fair to offer tribute here to her bravery

as well as to her wisdom, for at times she was in mortal

terror lest the precocious experimenter below

should, in his inexperience, make some awful

combination that would explode and bring down the

house in ruins on himself and the rest of the family.



Fortunately no such catastrophe happened, but

young Edison worked away in his embryonic laboratory,

satisfying his soul and incidentally depleting

his limited pocket-money to the vanishing-point. It

was, indeed, owing to this latter circumstance that in

a year or two his aspirations necessitated an increase

of revenue; and a consequent determination to earn

some money for himself led to his first real commercial

enterprise as "candy butcher" on the Grand Trunk

Railroad, already mentioned in a previous chapter.

It has also been related how his precious laboratory

was transferred to the train; how he and it were

subsequently expelled; and how it was re-established in

his home, where he continued studies and experiments

until the beginning of his career as a telegraph

operator.



The nomadic life of the next few years did not

lessen his devotion to study; but it stood seriously

in the way of satisfying the ever-present craving for

a laboratory. The lack of such a place never prevented

experimentation, however, as long as he had

a dollar in his pocket and some available "hole in

the wall." With the turning of the tide of fortune

that suddenly carried him, in New York in 1869, from

poverty to the opulence of $300 a month, he drew

nearer to a realization of his cherished ambition in

having money, place, and some time (stolen from

sleep) for more serious experimenting. Thus matters

continued until, at about the age of twenty-two,

Edison's inventions had brought him a relatively

large sum of money, and he became a very busy

manufacturer, and lessee of a large shop in Newark,

New Jersey.



Now, for the first time since leaving that boyish

laboratory in the old home at Port Huron, Edison

had a place of his own to work in, to think in; but

no one in any way acquainted with Newark as a

swarming centre of miscellaneous and multitudinous

industries would recommend it as a cloistered retreat

for brooding reverie and introspection, favorable to

creative effort. Some people revel in surroundings

of hustle and bustle, and find therein no hindrance

to great accomplishment. The electrical genius of

Newark is Edward Weston, who has thriven amid its

turmoil and there has developed his beautiful

instruments of precision; just as Brush worked out his

arc-lighting system in Cleveland; or even as Faraday,

surrounded by the din and roar of London, laid the

intellectual foundations of the whole modern science

of dynamic electricity. But Edison, though deaf,

could not make too hurried a retreat from Newark

to Menlo Park, where, as if to justify his change of

base, vital inventions soon came thick and fast, year

after year. The story of Menlo has been told in

another chapter, but the point was not emphasized

that Edison then, as later, tried hard to drop

manufacturing. He would infinitely rather be philosopher

than producer; but somehow the necessity of

manufacturing is constantly thrust back upon him by a

profound--perhaps finical--sense of dissatisfaction

with what other people make for him. The world

never saw a man more deeply and desperately convinced

that nothing in it approaches perfection. Edison

is the doctrine of evolution incarnate, applied to

mechanics. As to the removal from Newark, he may

be allowed to tell his own story: "I had a shop at

Newark in which I manufactured stock tickers and

such things. When I moved to Menlo Park I took

out only the machinery that would be necessary for

experimental purposes and left the manufacturing

machinery in the place. It consisted of many milling

machines and other tools for duplicating. I rented

this to a man who had formerly been my bookkeeper,

and who thought he could make money out of

manufacturing. There was about $10,000 worth of

machinery. He was to pay me $2000 a year for the

rent of the machinery and keep it in good order.

After I moved to Menlo Park, I was very busy with

the telephone and phonograph, and I paid no attention

to this little arrangement. About three years

afterward, it occurred to me that I had not heard at

all from the man who had rented this machinery, so

I thought I would go over to Newark and see how

things were going. When I got there, I found that

instead of being a machine shop it was a hotel! I

have since been utterly unable to find out what be

came of the man or the machinery." Such incidents

tend to justify Edison in his rather cynical remark

that he has always been able to improve machinery

much quicker than men. All the way up he has had

discouraging experiences. "One day while I was

carrying on my work in Newark, a Wall Street broker

came from the city and said he was tired of the

`Street,' and wanted to go into something real. He

said he had plenty of money. He wanted some kind

of a job to keep his mind off Wall Street. So we gave

him a job as a `mucker' in chemical experiments.

The second night he was there he could not stand the

long hours and fell asleep on a sofa. One of the boys

took a bottle of bromine and opened it under the

sofa. It floated up and produced a violent effect on

the mucous membrane. The broker was taken with

such a fit of coughing he burst a blood-vessel, and

the man who let the bromine out got away and never

came back. I suppose he thought there was going

to be a death. But the broker lived, and left the

next day; and I have never seen him since, either."

Edison tells also of another foolhardy laboratory

trick of the same kind: "Some of my assistants in

those days were very green in the business, as I did

not care whether they had had any experience or

not. I generally tried to turn them loose. One day

I got a new man, and told him to conduct a certain

experiment. He got a quart of ether and started to

boil it over a naked flame. Of course it caught fire.

The flame was about four feet in diameter and eleven

feet high. We had to call out the fire department;

and they came down and put a stream through the

window. That let all the fumes and chemicals out

and overcame the firemen; and there was the devil to

pay. Another time we experimented with a tub full of

soapy water, and put hydrogen into it to make large

bubbles. One of the boys, who was washing bottles in

the place, had read in some book that hydrogen was

explosive, so he proceeded to blow the tub up. There

was about four inches of soap in the bottom of the

tub, fourteen inches high; and he filled it with soap

bubbles up to the brim. Then he took a bamboo

fish-pole, put a piece of paper at the end, and

touched it off. It blew every window out of the

place."



Always a shrewd, observant, and kindly critic of

character, Edison tells many anecdotes of the men

who gathered around him in various capacities at

that quiet corner of New Jersey--Menlo Park--and

later at Orange, in the Llewellyn Park laboratory;

and these serve to supplement the main narrative by

throwing vivid side-lights on the whole scene. Here,

for example, is a picture drawn by Edison of a

laboratory interlude--just a bit Rabelaisian: "When

experimenting at Menlo Park we had all the way from

forty to fifty men. They worked all the time. Each

man was allowed from four to six hours' sleep. We

had a man who kept tally, and when the time came

for one to sleep, he was notified. At midnight we

had lunch brought in and served at a long table at

which the experimenters sat down. I also had an

organ which I procured from Hilbourne Roosevelt--

uncle of the ex-President--and we had a man play

this organ while we ate our lunch. During the summer-

time, after we had made something which was

successful, I used to engage a brick-sloop at Perth

Amboy and take the whole crowd down to the fishing-

banks on the Atlantic for two days. On one occasion

we got outside Sandy Hook on the banks and anchored.

A breeze came up, the sea became rough,

and a large number of the men were sick. There was

straw in the bottom of the boat, which we all slept

on. Most of the men adjourned to this straw very

sick. Those who were not got a piece of rancid salt

pork from the skipper, and cut a large, thick slice

out of it. This was put on the end of a fish-hook

and drawn across the men's faces. The smell was

terrific, and the effect added to the hilarity of the

excursion.



"I went down once with my father and two assistants

for a little fishing inside Sandy Hook. For some

reason or other the fishing was very poor. We anchored,

and I started in to fish. After fishing for

several hours there was not a single bite. The others

wanted to pull up anchor, but I fished two days and

two nights without a bite, until they pulled up anchor

and went away. I would not give up. I was going

to catch that fish if it took a week."



This is general. Let us quote one or two piquant

personal observations of a more specific nature as to

the odd characters Edison drew around him in his

experimenting. "Down at Menlo Park a man came

in one day and wanted a job. He was a sailor. I

hadn't any particular work to give him, but I had a

number of small induction coils, and to give him

something to do I told him to fix them up and sell

them among his sailor friends. They were fixed up,

and he went over to New York and sold them all.

He was an extraordinary fellow. His name was

Adams. One day I asked him how long it was since

he had been to sea, and he replied two or three years.

I asked him how he had made a living in the mean

time, before he came to Menlo Park. He said he

made a pretty good living by going around to different

clinics and getting $10 at each clinic, because of

having the worst case of heart-disease on record. I

told him if that was the case he would have to be very

careful around the laboratory. I had him there to

help in experimenting, and the heart-disease did not

seem to bother him at all.



"It appeared that he had once been a slaver; and

altogether he was a tough character. Having no

other man I could spare at that time, I sent him over

with my carbon transmitter telephone to exhibit it

in England. It was exhibited before the Post-Office

authorities. Professor Hughes spent an afternoon in

examining the apparatus, and in about a month came

out with his microphone, which was absolutely nothing

more nor less than my exact invention. But no

mention was made of the fact that, just previously,

he had seen the whole of my apparatus. Adams

stayed over in Europe connected with the telephone

for several years, and finally died of too much whiskey

--but not of heart-disease. This shows how whiskey

is the more dangerous of the two.



"Adams said that at one time he was aboard a

coffee-ship in the harbor of Santos, Brazil. He fell

down a hatchway and broke his arm. They took

him up to the hospital--a Portuguese one--where he

could not speak the language, and they did not

understand English. They treated him for two weeks for

yellow fever! He was certainly the most profane

man we ever had around the laboratory. He stood

high in his class."



And there were others of a different stripe. "We

had a man with us at Menlo called Segredor. He was

a queer kind of fellow. The men got in the habit of

plaguing him; and, finally, one day he said to the

assembled experimenters in the top room of the

laboratory: `The next man that does it, I will kill

him.' They paid no attention to this, and next day

one of them made some sarcastic remark to him.

Segredor made a start for his boarding-house, and

when they saw him coming back up the hill with a

gun, they knew there would be trouble, so they all

made for the woods. One of the men went back and

mollified him. He returned to his work; but he was

not teased any more. At last, when I sent men out

hunting for bamboo, I dispatched Segredor to Cuba.

He arrived in Havana on Tuesday, and on the Friday

following he was buried, having died of the black

vomit. On the receipt of the news of his death, half

a dozen of the men wanted his job, but my searcher

in the Astor Library reported that the chances of

finding the right kind of bamboo for lamps in Cuba

were very small; so I did not send a substitute."



Another thumb-nail sketch made of one of his

associates is this: "When experimenting with vacuum-

pumps to exhaust the incandescent lamps, I required

some very delicate and close manipulation of glass,

and hired a German glass-blower who was said to be

the most expert man of his kind in the United States.

He was the only one who could make clinical thermometers.

He was the most extraordinarily conceited

man I have ever come across. His conceit was

so enormous, life was made a burden to him by all

the boys around the laboratory. He once said that

he was educated in a university where all the students

belonged to families of the aristocracy; and the highest

class in the university all wore little red caps.

He said HE wore one."



Of somewhat different caliber was "honest" John

Kruesi, who first made his mark at Menlo Park, and

of whom Edison says: "One of the workmen I had

at Menlo Park was John Kruesi, who afterward became,

from his experience, engineer of the lighting

station, and subsequently engineer of the Edison

General Electric Works at Schenectady. Kruesi was

very exact in his expressions. At the time we were

promoting and putting up electric-light stations in

Pennsylvania, New York, and New England, there

would be delegations of different people who proposed

to pay for these stations. They would come to our

office in New York, at `65,' to talk over the specifications,

the cost, and other things. At first, Mr. Kruesi

was brought in, but whenever a statement was made

which he could not understand or did not believe could

be substantiated, he would blurt right out among

these prospects that he didn't believe it. Finally

it disturbed these committees so much, and raised so

many doubts in their minds, that one of my chief

associates said: `Here, Kruesi, we don't want you to

come to these meetings any longer. You are too painfully

honest.' I said to him: `We always tell the

truth. It may be deferred truth, but it is the truth.'

He could not understand that."



Various reasons conspired to cause the departure

from Menlo Park midway in the eighties. For Edison,

in spite of the achievement with which its name

will forever be connected, it had lost all its attractions

and all its possibilities. It had been outgrown

in many ways, and strange as the remark may seem,

it was not until he had left it behind and had settled

in Orange, New Jersey, that he can be said to have

given definite shape to his life. He was only forty

in 1887, and all that he had done up to that time,

tremendous as much of it was, had worn a haphazard,

Bohemian air, with all the inconsequential freedom

and crudeness somehow attaching to pioneer life.

The development of the new laboratory in West

Orange, just at the foot of Llewellyn Park, on the

Orange Mountains, not only marked the happy beginning

of a period of perfect domestic and family

life, but saw in the planning and equipment of a

model laboratory plant the consummation of youthful

dreams, and of the keen desire to enjoy resources

adequate at any moment to whatever strain the fierce

fervor of research might put upon them. Curiously

enough, while hitherto Edison had sought to

dissociate his experimenting from his manufacturing,

here he determined to develop a large industry to

which a thoroughly practical laboratory would be a

central feature, and ever a source of suggestion and

inspiration. Edison's standpoint to-day is that an

evil to be dreaded in manufacture is that of over-

standardization, and that as soon as an article is

perfect that is the time to begin improving it. But he

who would improve must experiment.



The Orange laboratory, as originally planned, consisted

of a main building two hundred and fifty feet

long and three stories in height, together with four

other structures, each one hundred by twenty-five

feet, and only one story in height. All these were

substantially built of brick. The main building was

divided into five chief divisions--the library, office,

machine shops, experimental and chemical rooms,

and stock-room. The use of the smaller buildings

will be presently indicated.



Surrounding the whole was erected a high picket

fence with a gate placed on Valley Road. At this

point a gate-house was provided and put in charge

of a keeper, for then, as at the present time, Edison

was greatly sought after; and, in order to accomplish

any work at all, he was obliged to deny himself to all

but the most important callers. The keeper of the

gate was usually chosen with reference to his capacity

for stony-hearted implacability and adherence to

instructions; and this choice was admirably made in

one instance when a new gateman, not yet thoroughly

initiated, refused admittance to Edison himself. It

was of no use to try and explain. To the gateman

EVERY ONE was persona non grata without proper

credentials, and Edison had to wait outside until he

could get some one to identify him.



On entering the main building the first doorway

from the ample passage leads the visitor into a handsome

library finished throughout in yellow pine,

occupying the entire width of the building, and

almost as broad as long. The centre of this spacious

room is an open rectangular space about forty by

twenty-five feet, rising clear about forty feet

from the main floor to a panelled ceiling. Around

the sides of the room, bounding this open space, run

two tiers of gallery, divided, as is the main floor

beneath them; into alcoves of liberal dimensions. These

alcoves are formed by racks extending from floor to

ceiling, fitted with shelves, except on two sides of both

galleries, where they are formed by a series of glass-

fronted cabinets containing extensive collections of

curious and beautiful mineralogical and geological

specimens, among which is the notable Tiffany-Kunz

collection of minerals acquired by Edison some years

ago. Here and there in these cabinets may also be

found a few models which he has used at times in his

studies of anatomy and physiology.



The shelves on the remainder of the upper gallery

and part of those on the first gallery are filled with


countless thousands of specimens of ores and minerals

of every conceivable kind gathered from all parts of

the world, and all tagged and numbered. The remaining

shelves of the first gallery are filled with current

numbers (and some back numbers) of the numerous

periodicals to which Edison subscribes. Here

may be found the popular magazines, together with

those of a technical nature relating to electricity,

chemistry, engineering, mechanics, building, cement,

building materials, drugs, water and gas, power,

automobiles, railroads, aeronautics, philosophy, hygiene,

physics, telegraphy, mining, metallurgy, metals,

music, and others; also theatrical weeklies, as well

as the proceedings and transactions of various learned

and technical societies.



The first impression received as one enters on the

main floor of the library and looks around is that of

noble proportions and symmetry as a whole. The

open central space of liberal dimensions and height,

flanked by the galleries and relieved by four handsome

electric-lighting fixtures suspended from the

ceiling by long chains, conveys an idea of lofty

spaciousness; while the huge open fireplace, surmounted

by a great clock built into the wall, at one

end of the room, the large rugs, the arm-chairs

scattered around, the tables and chairs in the alcoves,

give a general air of comfort combined with utility.

In one of the larger alcoves, at the sunny end of the

main hall, is Edison's own desk, where he may usually

be seen for a while in the early morning hours looking

over his mail or otherwise busily working on matters

requiring his attention.



At the opposite end of the room, not far from the

open fireplace, is a long table surrounded by swivel

desk-chairs. It is here that directors' meetings are

sometimes held, and also where weighty matters are

often discussed by Edison at conference with his

closer associates. It has been the privilege of the

writers to be present at some of these conferences,

not only as participants, but in some cases as lookers-

on while awaiting their turn. On such occasions an

interesting opportunity is offered to study Edison

in his intense and constructive moods. Apparently

oblivious to everything else, he will listen with

concentrated mind and close attention, and then pour

forth a perfect torrent of ideas and plans, and,

if the occasion calls for it, will turn around to the

table, seize a writing-pad and make sketch after

sketch with lightning-like rapidity, tearing off each

sheet as filled and tossing it aside to the floor. It

is an ordinary indication that there has been an

interesting meeting when the caretaker about fills a

waste-basket with these discarded sketches.



Directly opposite the main door is a beautiful

marble statue purchased by Edison at the Paris

Exposition in 1889, on the occasion of his visit there.

The statue, mounted on a base three feet high, is an

allegorical representation of the supremacy of electric

light over all other forms of illumination, carried out

by the life-size figure of a youth with half-spread

wings seated upon the ruins of a street gas-lamp,

holding triumphantly high above his head an electric

incandescent lamp. Grouped about his feet are a

gear-wheel, voltaic pile, telegraph key, and telephone.

This work of art was executed by A. Bordiga, of Rome,

held a prominent place in the department devoted to

Italian art at the Paris Exposition, and naturally

appealed to Edison as soon as he saw it.



In the middle distance, between the entrance door

and this statue, has long stood a magnificent palm,

but at the present writing it has been set aside to

give place to a fine model of the first type of the

Edison poured cement house, which stands in a

miniature artificial lawn upon a special table prepared

for it; while on the floor at the foot of the

table are specimens of the full-size molds in which

the house will be cast.



The balustrades of the galleries and all other available

places are filled with portraits of great scientists

and men of achievement, as well as with pictures of historic

and scientific interest. Over the fireplace hangs

a large photograph showing the Edison cement plant

in its entire length, flanked on one end of the mantel

by a bust of Humboldt, and on the other by a statuette

of Sandow, the latter having been presented to Edison

by the celebrated athlete after the visit he made to

Orange to pose for the motion pictures in the earliest

days of their development. On looking up under

the second gallery at this end is seen a great roll

resting in sockets placed on each side of the room.

This is a huge screen or curtain which may be drawn

down to the floor to provide a means of projection

for lantern slides or motion pictures, for the

entertainment or instruction of Edison and his guests.

In one of the larger alcoves is a large terrestrial globe

pivoted in its special stand, together with a relief

map of the United States; and here and there are

handsomely mounted specimens of underground

conductors and electric welds that were made at the

Edison Machine Works at Schenectady before it was

merged into the General Electric Company. On two

pedestals stand, respectively, two other mementoes

of the works, one a fifteen-light dynamo of the Edison

type, and the other an elaborate electric fan--both

of them gifts from associates or employees.



In noting these various objects of interest one

must not lose sight of the fact that this part of the

building is primarily a library, if indeed that fact did

not at once impress itself by a glance at the well-

filled unglazed book-shelves in the alcoves of the

main floor. Here Edison's catholic taste in reading

becomes apparent as one scans the titles of

thousands of volumes ranged upon the shelves,

for they include astronomy, botany, chemistry,

dynamics, electricity, engineering, forestry, geology,

geography, mechanics, mining, medicine, metallurgy,

magnetism, philosophy, psychology, physics, steam,

steam-engines, telegraphy, telephony, and many

others. Besides these there are the journals and

proceedings of numerous technical societies;

encyclopaedias of various kinds; bound series of important

technical magazines; a collection of United States

and foreign patents, embracing some hundreds of

volumes, together with an extensive assortment of

miscellaneous books of special and general interest.

There is another big library up in the house on the

hill--in fact, there are books upon books all over the

home. And wherever they are, those books are read.



As one is about to pass out of the library attention

is arrested by an incongruity in the form of a cot,

which stands in an alcove near the door. Here Edison,

throwing himself down, sometimes seeks a short

rest during specially long working tours. Sleep is

practically instantaneous and profound, and he awakes

in immediate and full possession of his faculties,

arising from the cot and going directly "back to the

job" without a moment's hesitation, just as a person

wide awake would arise from a chair and proceed to

attend to something previously determined upon.



Immediately outside the library is the famous

stock-room, about which much has been written and

invented. Its fame arose from the fact that Edison

planned it to be a repository of some quantity, great

or small, of every known and possibly useful substance

not readily perishable, together with the most

complete assortment of chemicals and drugs that

experience and knowledge could suggest. Always

strenuous in his experimentation, and the living

embodiment of the spirit of the song, I Want What I

Want When I Want It, Edison had known for years

what it was to be obliged to wait, and sometimes

lack, for some substance or chemical that he thought

necessary to the success of an experiment. Naturally

impatient at any delay which interposed in his

insistent and searching methods, and realizing the

necessity of maintaining the inspiration attending

his work at any time, he determined to have within

his immediate reach the natural resources of the

world.



Hence it is not surprising to find the stock-room

not only a museum, but a sample-room of nature, as

well as a supply department. To a casual visitor the

first view of this heterogeneous collection is quite

bewildering, but on more mature examination it resolves

itself into a natural classification--as, for instance,

objects pertaining to various animals, birds,

and fishes, such as skins, hides, hair, fur, feathers,

wool, quills, down, bristles, teeth, bones, hoofs,

horns, tusks, shells; natural products, such as woods,

barks, roots, leaves, nuts, seeds, herbs, gums, grains,

flours, meals, bran; also minerals in great assortment;

mineral and vegetable oils, clay, mica, ozokerite,

etc. In the line of textiles, cotton and silk

threads in great variety, with woven goods of all

kinds from cheese-cloth to silk plush. As for paper,

there is everything in white and colored, from thinnest

tissue up to the heaviest asbestos, even a few

newspapers being always on hand. Twines of all

sizes, inks, waxes, cork, tar, resin, pitch, turpentine,

asphalt, plumbago, glass in sheets and tubes; and a

host of miscellaneous articles revealed on looking

around the shelves, as well as an interminable col-

lection of chemicals, including acids, alkalies, salts,

reagents, every conceivable essential oil and all the

thinkable extracts. It may be remarked that this

collection includes the eighteen hundred or more

fluorescent salts made by Edison during his experimental

search for the best material for a fluoroscope

in the initial X-ray period. All known metals in

form of sheet, rod and tube, and of great variety in

thickness, are here found also, together with a most

complete assortment of tools and accessories for machine

shop and laboratory work.



The list is confined to the merest general mention

of the scope of this remarkable and interesting collection,

as specific details would stretch out into a

catalogue of no small proportions. When it is

stated, however, that a stock clerk is kept

exceedingly busy all day answering the numerous and

various demands upon him, the reader will appreciate

that this comprehensive assortment is not merely a

fad of Edison's, but stands rather as a substantial

tribute to his wide-angled view of possible requirements

as his various investigations take him far afield.

It has no counterpart in the world!



Beyond the stock-room, and occupying about half

the building on the same floor, lie a machine shop,

engine-room, and boiler-room. This machine shop is

well equipped, and in it is constantly employed a

large force of mechanics whose time is occupied in

constructing the heavier class of models and mechanical

devices called for by the varied experiments and

inventions always going on.



Immediately above, on the second floor, is found

another machine shop in which is maintained a corps

of expert mechanics who are called upon to do work

of greater precision and fineness, in the construction

of tools and experimental models. This is the realm

presided over lovingly by John F. Ott, who has been

Edison's designer of mechanical devices for over

forty years. He still continues to ply his craft with

unabated skill and oversees the work of the mechanics

as his productions are wrought into concrete shape.



In one of the many experimental-rooms lining the

sides of the second floor may usually be seen his

younger brother, Fred Ott, whose skill as a dexterous

manipulator and ingenious mechanic has found

ample scope for exercise during the thirty-two years

of his service with Edison, not only at the regular

laboratories, but also at that connected with the

inventor's winter home in Florida. Still another

of the Ott family, the son of John F., for some

years past has been on the experimental staff of the

Orange laboratory. Although possessing in no small

degree the mechanical and manipulative skill of the

family, he has chosen chemistry as his special domain,

and may be found with the other chemists in one of

the chemical-rooms.



On this same floor is the vacuum-pump room with

a glass-blowers' room adjoining, both of them historic

by reason of the strenuous work done on incandescent

lamps and X-ray tubes within their walls.

The tools and appliances are kept intact, for Edison

calls occasionally for their use in some of his later

experiments, and there is a suspicion among the

laboratory staff that some day he may resume work

on incandescent lamps. Adjacent to these rooms are

several others devoted to physical and mechanical

experiments, together with a draughting-room.



Last to be mentioned, but the first in order as

one leaves the head of the stairs leading up to this

floor, is No. 12, Edison's favorite room, where he

will frequently be found. Plain of aspect, being

merely a space boarded off with tongued-and-grooved

planks--as all the other rooms are--without ornament

or floor covering, and containing only a few

articles of cheap furniture, this room seems to exercise

a nameless charm for him. The door is always

open, and often he can be seen seated at a plain table

in the centre of the room, deeply intent on some of

the numerous problems in which he is interested.

The table is usually pretty well filled with specimens

or data of experimental results which have been put

there for his examination. At the time of this writing

these specimens consist largely of sections of

positive elements of the storage battery, together

with many samples of nickel hydrate, to which

Edison devotes deep study. Close at hand is a microscope

which is in frequent use by him in these investigations.

Around the room, on shelves, are hundreds

of bottles each containing a small quantity of

nickel hydrate made in as many different ways, each

labelled correspondingly. Always at hand will be

found one or two of the laboratory note-books, with

frequent entries or comments in the handwriting which

once seen is never forgotten.



No. 12 is at times a chemical, a physical, or a

mechanical room--occasionally a combination of all,

while sometimes it might be called a consultation-

room or clinic--for often Edison may be seen there in

animated conference with a group of his assistants;

but its chief distinction lies in its being one of his

favorite haunts, and in the fact that within its walls

have been settled many of the perplexing problems

and momentous questions that have brought about

great changes in electrical and engineering arts during

the twenty-odd years that have elapsed since the

Orange laboratory was built.



Passing now to the top floor the visitor finds himself

at the head of a broad hall running almost the

entire length of the building, and lined mostly with

glass-fronted cabinets containing a multitude of

experimental incandescent lamps and an immense

variety of models of phonographs, motors, telegraph

and telephone apparatus, meters, and a host of other

inventions upon which Edison's energies have at one

time and another been bent. Here also are other

cabinets containing old papers and records, while

further along the wall are piled up boxes of historical

models and instruments. In fact, this hallway, with

its conglomerate contents, may well be considered

a scientific attic. It is to be hoped that at no distant

day these Edisoniana will be assembled and arranged

in a fireproof museum for the benefit of posterity.



In the front end of the building, and extending

over the library, is a large room intended originally and

used for a time as the phonograph music-hall for

record-making, but now used only as an experimental-

room for phonograph work, as the growth of the

industry has necessitated a very much larger and

more central place where records can be made on a

commercial scale. Even the experimental work imposes

no slight burden on it. On each side of the

hallway above mentioned, rooms are partitioned off

and used for experimental work of various kinds,

mostly phonographic, although on this floor are also

located the storage-battery testing-room, a chemical

and physical room and Edison's private office, where

all his personal correspondence and business affairs

are conducted by his personal secretary, Mr. H. F.

Miller. A visitor to this upper floor of the laboratory

building cannot but be impressed with a consciousness

of the incessant efforts that are being made to

improve the reproducing qualities of the phonograph,

as he hears from all sides the sounds of vocal and

instrumental music constantly varying in volume and

timbre, due to changes in the experimental devices

under trial.



The traditions of the laboratory include cots placed

in many of the rooms of these upper floors, but that

was in the earlier years when the strenuous scenes

of Menlo Park were repeated in the new quarters.

Edison and his closest associates were accustomed

to carry their labors far into the wee sma' hours,

and when physical nature demanded a respite from

work, a short rest would be obtained by going to bed

on a cot. One would naturally think that the wear

and tear of this intense application, day after day

and night after night, would have tended to induce

a heaviness and gravity of demeanor in these busy

men; but on the contrary, the old spirit of good-

humor and prankishness was ever present, as its fre-

quent outbursts manifested from time to time. One

instance will serve as an illustration. One morning,

about 2.30, the late Charles Batchelor announced that

he was tired and would go to bed. Leaving Edison

and the others busily working, he went out and returned

quietly in slippered feet, with his nightgown

on, the handle of a feather duster stuck down his

back with the feathers waving over his head, and his

face marked. With unearthly howls and shrieks, a

l'Indien, he pranced about the room, incidentally giving

Edison a scare that made him jump up from his

work. He saw the joke quickly, however, and joined

in the general merriment caused by this prank.



Leaving the main building with its corps of busy

experimenters, and coming out into the spacious

yard, one notes the four long single-story brick

structures mentioned above. The one nearest the Valley

Road is called the galvanometer-room, and was

originally intended by Edison to be used for the most

delicate and minute electrical measurements. In

order to provide rigid resting-places for the numerous

and elaborate instruments he had purchased for this

purpose, the building was equipped along three-

quarters of its length with solid pillars, or tables, of

brick set deep in the earth. These were built up to

a height of about two and a half feet, and each was

surmounted with a single heavy slab of black marble.

A cement floor was laid, and every precaution was

taken to render the building free from all magnetic

influences, so that it would be suitable for electrical

work of the utmost accuracy and precision. Hence,

iron and steel were entirely eliminated in its con-

struction, copper being used for fixtures for steam

and water piping, and, indeed, for all other purposes

where metal was employed.



This room was for many years the headquarters of

Edison's able assistant, Dr. A. E. Kennelly, now professor

of electrical engineering in Harvard University

to whose energetic and capable management were intrusted

many scientific investigations during his long

sojourn at the laboratory. Unfortunately, however, for

the continued success of Edison's elaborate plans, he

had not been many years established in the laboratory

before a trolley road through West Orange was projected

and built, the line passing in front of the plant

and within seventy-five feet of the galvanometer-

room, thus making it practically impossible to use

it for the delicate purposes for which it was originally

intended.



For some time past it has been used for photography

and some special experiments on motion pictures as

well as for demonstrations connected with physical

research; but some reminders of its old-time glory

still remain in evidence. In lofty and capacious

glass-enclosed cabinets, in company with numerous

models of Edison's inventions, repose many of the

costly and elaborate instruments rendered useless by

the ubiquitous trolley. Instruments are all about,

on walls, tables, and shelves, the photometer is covered

up; induction coils of various capacities, with

other electrical paraphernalia, lie around, almost as

if the experimenter were absent for a few days but

would soon return and resume his work.



In numbering the group of buildings, the galva-

nometer-room is No. 1, while the other single-story

structures are numbered respectively 2, 3, and 4.

On passing out of No. 1 and proceeding to the succeeding

building is noticed, between the two, a garage

of ample dimensions and a smaller structure, at the

door of which stands a concrete-mixer. In this

small building Edison has made some of his most

important experiments in the process of working out

his plans for the poured house. It is in this little

place that there was developed the remarkable mixture

which is to play so vital a part in the successful

construction of these everlasting homes for

living millions.



Drawing near to building No. 2, olfactory evidence

presents itself of the immediate vicinity of a chemical

laboratory. This is confirmed as one enters the door

and finds that the entire building is devoted to

chemistry. Long rows of shelves and cabinets filled

with chemicals line the room; a profusion of retorts,

alembics, filters, and other chemical apparatus on

numerous tables and stands, greet the eye, while a

corps of experimenters may be seen busy in the

preparation of various combinations, some of which are

boiling or otherwise cooking under their dexterous

manipulation.



It would not require many visits to discover that

in this room, also, Edison has a favorite nook. Down

at the far end in a corner are a plain little table and

chair, and here he is often to be found deeply immersed

in a study of the many experiments that are

being conducted. Not infrequently he is actively

engaged in the manipulation of some compound of

special intricacy, whose results might be illuminative

of obscure facts not patent to others than himself.

Here, too, is a select little library of chemical literature.



The next building, No. 3, has a double mission--

the farther half being partitioned off for a pattern-

making shop, while the other half is used as a store-

room for chemicals in quantity and for chemical

apparatus and utensils. A grimly humorous incident,

as related by one of the laboratory staff, attaches to

No. 3. It seems that some time ago one of the

helpers in the chemical department, an excitable

foreigner, became dissatisfied with his wages, and

after making an unsuccessful application for an

increase, rushed in desperation to Edison, and said

"Eef I not get more money I go to take ze cyanide

potassia." Edison gave him one quick, searching

glance and, detecting a bluff, replied in an offhand

manner: "There's a five-pound bottle in No. 3," and

turned to his work again. The foreigner did not go

to get the cyanide, but gave up his job.



The last of these original buildings, No. 4, was used

for many years in Edison's ore-concentrating experiments,

and also for rough-and-ready operations of

other kinds, such as furnace work and the like. At

the present writing it is used as a general stock-room.



In the foregoing details, the reader has been afforded

but a passing glance at the great practical working

equipment which constitutes the theatre of Edison's

activities, for, in taking a general view of such a

unique and comprehensive laboratory plant, its salient

features only can be touched upon to advantage.

It would be but repetition to enumerate here the practical

results of the laboratory work during the past two

decades, as they appear on other pages of this work.

Nor can one assume for a moment that the history

of Edison's laboratory is a closed book. On the contrary,

its territorial boundaries have been increasing

step by step with the enlargement of its labors, until

now it has been obliged to go outside its own proper

domains to occupy some space in and about the great

Edison industrial buildings and space immediately

adjacent. It must be borne in mind that the laboratory

is only the core of a group of buildings devoted

to production on a huge scale by hundreds of artisans.



Incidental mention has already been made of the

laboratory at Edison's winter residence in Florida,

where he goes annually to spend a month or six

weeks. This is a miniature copy of the Orange laboratory,

with its machine shop, chemical-room, and general

experimental department. While it is only in

use during his sojourn there, and carries no extensive

corps of assistants, the work done in it is not of a

perfunctory nature, but is a continuation of his regular

activities, and serves to keep him in touch with the

progress of experiments at Orange, and enables him

to give instructions for their variation and continuance

as their scope is expanded by his own investigations

made while enjoying what he calls "vacation." What

Edison in Florida speaks of as "loafing" would be

for most of us extreme and healthy activity in the

cooler Far North.



A word or two may be devoted to the visitors received

at the laboratory, and to the correspondence.

It might be injudicious to gauge the greatness of a

man by the number of his callers or his letters; but

they are at least an indication of the degree to which

he interests the world. In both respects, for these

forty years, Edison has been a striking example of

the manner in which the sentiment of hero-worship

can manifest itself, and of the deep desire of curiosity

to get satisfaction by personal observation or contact.

Edison's mail, like that of most well-known

men, is extremely large, but composed in no small

degree of letters--thousands of them yearly--that

concern only the writers, and might well go to the

waste-paper basket without prolonged consideration.

The serious and important part of the mail, some

personal and some business, occupies the attention of

several men; all such letters finding their way promptly

into the proper channels, often with a pithy

endorsement by Edison scribbled on the margin. What

to do with a host of others it is often difficult to

decide, even when written by "cranks," who imagine

themselves subject to strange electrical ailments from

which Edison alone can relieve them. Many people

write asking his opinion as to a certain invention, or

offering him an interest in it if he will work it out.

Other people abroad ask help in locating lost

relatives; and many want advice as to what they shall

do with their sons, frequently budding geniuses whose

ability to wire a bell has demonstrated unusual

qualities. A great many persons want autographs,

and some would like photographs. The amazing

thing about it all is that this flood of miscellaneous

letters flows on in one steady, uninterrupted stream,

year in and year out; always a curious psychological

study in its variety and volume; and ever a

proof of the fact that once a man has become established

as a personality in the public eye and mind,

nothing can stop the tide of correspondence that

will deluge him.



It is generally, in the nature of things, easier to

write a letter than to make a call; and the semi-

retirement of Edison at a distance of an hour by

train from New York stands as a means of protection

to him against those who would certainly present

their respects in person, if he could be got at without

trouble. But it may be seriously questioned whether

in the aggregate Edison's visitors are less numerous

or less time-consuming than his epistolary besiegers.

It is the common experience of any visitor to the

laboratory that there are usually several persons

ahead of him, no matter what the hour of the day, and

some whose business has been sufficiently vital to

get them inside the porter's gate, or even into the big

library and lounging-room. Celebrities of all kinds

and distinguished foreigners are numerous--princes,

noblemen, ambassadors, artists, litterateurs, scientists,

financiers, women. A very large part of the visiting

is done by scientific bodies and societies; and then

the whole place will be turned over to hundreds of

eager, well-dressed men and women, anxious to see

everything and to be photographed in the big courtyard

around the central hero. Nor are these groups

and delegations limited to this country, for even

large parties of English, Dutch, Italian, or Japanese

visitors come from time to time, and are greeted with

the same ready hospitality, although Edison, it is easy to

see, is torn between the conflicting emotions of a desire to

be courteous, and an anxiety to guard the precious hours

of work, or watch the critical stage of a new experiment.



One distinct group of visitors has always been

constituted by the "newspaper men." Hardly a day

goes by that the journals do not contain some reference

to Edison's work or remarks; and the items are

generally based on an interview. The reporters are

never away from the laboratory very long; for if they

have no actual mission of inquiry, there is always the

chance of a good story being secured offhand; and

the easy, inveterate good-nature of Edison toward

reporters is proverbial in the craft. Indeed, it must

be stated here that once in a while this confidence has

been abused; that stories have been published utterly

without foundation; that interviews have been

printed which never took place; that articles with

Edison's name as author have been widely circulated,

although he never saw them; and that in such ways

he has suffered directly. But such occasional incidents

tend in no wise to lessen Edison's warm admiration

of the press or his readiness to avail himself of

it whenever a representative goes over to Orange to

get the truth or the real facts in regard to any matter

of public importance. As for the newspaper clippings

containing such articles, or others in which Edison's

name appears--they are literally like sands of the

sea-shore for number; and the archives of the laboratory

that preserve only a very minute percentage of

them are a further demonstration of what publicity

means, where a figure like Edison is concerned.



