




CHAPTER XVII



OTHER EARLY STATIONS--THE METER



WE have now seen the Edison lighting system

given a complete, convincing demonstration in

Paris, London, and New York; and have noted steps

taken for its introduction elsewhere on both sides

of the Atlantic. The Paris plant, like that at the

Crystal Palace, was a temporary exhibit. The London

plant was less temporary, but not permanent,

supplying before it was torn out no fewer than

three thousand lamps in hotels, churches, stores, and

dwellings in the vicinity of Holborn Viaduct. There

Messrs. Johnson and Hammer put into practice many

of the ideas now standard in the art, and secured

much useful data for the work in New York, of

which the story has just been told.



As a matter of fact the first Edison commercial

station to be operated in this country was that at

Appleton, Wisconsin, but its only serious claim to

notice is that it was the initial one of the system

driven by water-power. It went into service August

15, 1882, about three weeks before the Pearl Street

station. It consisted of one small dynamo of a

capacity of two hundred and eighty lights of 10 c.p.

each, and was housed in an unpretentious wooden

shed. The dynamo-electric machine, though small,

was robust, for under all the varying speeds of water-

power, and the vicissitudes of the plant to which it,

belonged, it continued in active use until 1899--

seventeen years.



Edison was from the first deeply impressed with

the possibilities of water-power, and, as this incident

shows, was prompt to seize such a very early opportunity.

But his attention was in reality concentrated

closely on the supply of great centres of population,

a task which he then felt might well occupy his lifetime;

and except in regard to furnishing isolated

plants he did not pursue further the development of

hydro-electric stations. That was left to others, and

to the application of the alternating current, which

has enabled engineers to harness remote powers, and,

within thoroughly economical limits, transmit thousands

of horse-power as much as two hundred miles at

pressures of 80,000 and 100,000 volts. Owing to his

insistence on low pressure, direct current for use in

densely populated districts, as the only safe and truly

universal, profitable way of delivering electrical

energy to the consumers, Edison has been frequently

spoken of as an opponent of the alternating current.

This does him an injustice. At the time a measure

was before the Virginia legislature, in 1890, to limit

the permissible pressures of current so as to render

it safe, he said: "You want to allow high pressure

wherever the conditions are such that by no possible

accident could that pressure get into the houses of

the consumers; you want to give them all the latitude

you can." In explaining this he added: "Suppose

you want to take the falls down at Richmond,

and want to put up a water-power? Why, if we

erect a station at the falls, it is a great economy to

get it up to the city. By digging a cheap trench and

putting in an insulated cable, and connecting such

station with the central part of Richmond, having

the end of the cable come up into the station from

the earth and there connected with motors, the power

of the falls would be transmitted to these motors.

If now the motors were made to run dynamos conveying

low-pressure currents to the public, there is

no possible way whereby this high-pressure current

could get to the public." In other words, Edison

made the sharp fundamental distinction between high

pressure alternating current for transmission and low

pressure direct current for distribution; and this is

exactly the practice that has been adopted in all the

great cities of the country to-day. There seems no

good reason for believing that it will change. It

might perhaps have been altogether better for Edison,

from the financial standpoint, if he had not identified

himself so completely with one kind of current, but

that made no difference to him, as it was a matter of

conviction; and Edison's convictions are granitic.

Moreover, this controversy over the two currents,

alternating and direct, which has become historical

in the field of electricity--and is something like the

"irrepressible conflict" we heard of years ago in

national affairs--illustrates another aspect of Edison's

character. Broad as the prairies and free in thought

as the winds that sweep them, he is idiosyncratically

opposed to loose and wasteful methods, to plans of

empire that neglect the poor at the gate. Every-

thing he has done has been aimed at the conservation

of energy, the contraction of space, the intensification

of culture. Burbank and his tribe represent

in the vegetable world, Edison in the mechanical.

Not only has he developed distinctly new species,

but he has elucidated the intensive art of getting

$1200 out of an electrical acre instead of $12--a

manured market-garden inside London and a ten-

bushel exhausted wheat farm outside Lawrence,

Kansas, being the antipodes of productivity--yet

very far short of exemplifying the difference of electrical

yield between an acre of territory in Edison's

"first New York district" and an acre in some small

town.



Edison's lighting work furnished an excellent basis--

in fact, the only one--for the development of the alternating

current now so generally employed in central-

station work in America; and in the McGraw Electrical

Directory of April, 1909, no fewer than 4164 stations

out of 5780 reported its use. When the alternating

current was introduced for practical purposes it was

not needed for arc lighting, the circuit for which,

from a single dynamo, would often be twenty or

thirty miles in length, its current having a pressure

of not less than five or six thousand volts. For some

years it was not found feasible to operate motors on

alternating-current circuits, and that reason was

often urged against it seriously. It could not be

used for electroplating or deposition, nor could it

charge storage batteries, all of which are easily within

the ability of the direct current. But when it came

to be a question of lighting a scattered suburb, a

group of dwellings on the outskirts, a remote country

residence or a farm-house, the alternating current, in

all elements save its danger, was and is ideal. Its

thin wires can be carried cheaply over vast areas,

and at each local point of consumption the transformer

of size exactly proportioned to its local task

takes the high-voltage transmission current and

lowers its potential at a ratio of 20 or 40 to 1, for use

in distribution and consumption circuits. This evolution

has been quite distinct, with its own inventors

like Gaulard and Gibbs and Stanley, but came subsequent

to the work of supplying small, dense areas

of population; the art thus growing from within,

and using each new gain as a means for further

achievement.



Nor was the effect of such great advances as those

made by Edison limited to the electrical field. Every

department of mechanics was stimulated and benefited

to an extraordinary degree. Copper for the

circuits was more highly refined than ever before to

secure the best conductivity, and purity was insisted

on in every kind of insulation. Edison was intolerant

of sham and shoddy, and nothing would satisfy him

that could not stand cross-examination by microscope,

test-tube, and galvanometer. It was, perhaps,

the steam-engine on which the deepest imprint for

good was made, referred to already in the remarks

of Mr. F. J. Sprague in the preceding chapter, but

best illustrated in the perfection of the modern high-

speed engine of the Armington & Sims type. Unless

he could secure an engine of smoother running and

more exactly governed and regulated than those avail-

able for his dynamo and lamp, Edison realized that

he would find it almost impossible to give a steady

light. He did not want his customers to count the

heart-beats of the engine in the flicker of the lamp.

Not a single engine was even within gunshot of the

standard thus set up, but the emergency called forth

its man in Gardiner C. Sims, a talented draughtsman

and designer who had been engaged in locomotive

construction and in the engineering department of

the United States Navy. He may be quoted as to

what happened: "The deep interest, financial and

moral, and friendly backing I received from Mr.

Edison, together with valuable suggestions, enabled

me to bring out the engine; as I was quite alone in

the world--poor--I had found a friend who knew

what he wanted and explained it clearly. Mr. Edison

was a leader far ahead of the time. He compelled the

design of the successful engine.



"Our first engine compelled the inventing and making

of a suitable engine indicator to indicate it--the

Tabor. He obtained the desired speed and load

with a friction brake; also regulator of speed; but

waited for an indicator to verify it. Then again there

was no known way to lubricate an engine for continuous

running, and Mr. Edison informed me that as a

marine engine started before the ship left New York

and continued running until it reached its home

port, so an engine for his purposes must produce

light at all times. That was a poser to me, for a

five-hours' run was about all that had been required

up to that time.



"A day or two later Mr. Edison inquired: `How far

is it from here to Lawrence; it is a long walk, isn't it?'

`Yes, rather.' He said: `Of course you will understand

I meant without oil.' To say I was deeply perplexed

does not express my feelings. We were at

the machine works, Goerck Street. I started for the

oil-room, when, about entering, I saw a small funnel

lying on the floor. It had been stepped on and

flattened. I took it up, and it had solved the engine-

oiling problem--and my walk to Lawrence like a

tramp actor's was off! The eccentric strap had a round

glass oil-cup with a brass base that screwed into the

strap. I took it off, and making a sketch, went to

Dave Cunningham, having the funnel in my hand to

illustrate what I wanted made. I requested him to

make a sheet-brass oil-cup and solder it to the base

I had. He did so. I then had a standard made to

hold another oil-cup, so as to see and regulate the

drop-feed. On this combination I obtained a patent

which is now universally used."



It is needless to say that in due course the engine

builders of the United States developed a variety of

excellent prime movers for electric-light and power

plants, and were grateful to the art from which such

a stimulus came to their industry; but for many

years one never saw an Edison installation without

expecting to find one or more Armington & Sims high-

speed engines part of it. Though the type has gone

out of existence, like so many other things that are

useful in their day and generation, it was once a very

vital part of the art, and one more illustration of that

intimate manner in which the advances in different

fields of progress interact and co-operate.



Edison had installed his historic first great central-

station system in New York on the multiple arc system

covered by his feeder and main invention, which

resulted in a notable saving in the cost of conductors

as against a straight two-wire system throughout of

the "tree" kind. He soon foresaw that still greater

economy would be necessary for commercial success

not alone for the larger territory opening, but for the

compact districts of large cities. Being firmly convinced

that there was a way out, he pushed aside a

mass of other work, and settled down to this problem,

with the result that on November 20, 1882, only two

months after current had been sent out from Pearl

Street, he executed an application for a patent covering

what is now known as the "three-wire system."

It has been universally recognized as one of the most

valuable inventions in the history of the lighting art.[13]

Its use resulted in a saving of over 60 per cent. of copper

in conductors, figured on the most favorable basis

previously known, inclusive of those calculated under

his own feeder and main system. Such economy of

outlay being effected in one of the heaviest items of

expense in central-station construction, it was now

made possible to establish plants in towns where the

large investment would otherwise have been quite

prohibitive. The invention is in universal use today,

alike for direct and for alternating current, and

as well in the equipment of large buildings as in the

distribution system of the most extensive central-station

networks. One cannot imagine the art without it.





[13] For technical description and illustration of this invention,

see Appendix.





The strong position held by the Edison system,

under the strenuous competition that was already

springing up, was enormously improved by the

introduction of the three-wire system; and it gave an

immediate impetus to incandescent lighting. Desiring

to put this new system into practical use promptly,

and receiving applications for licenses from all

over the country, Edison selected Brockton,

Massachusetts, and Sunbury, Pennsylvania, as the two

towns for the trial. Of these two Brockton required

the larger plant, but with the conductors placed

underground. It was the first to complete its arrangements

and close its contract. Mr. Henry Villard, it

will be remembered, had married the daughter of

Garrison, the famous abolitionist, and it was through

his relationship with the Garrison family that Brockton

came to have the honor of exemplifying so soon

the principles of an entirely new art. Sunbury, however,

was a much smaller installation, employed overhead

conductors, and hence was the first to "cross the

tape." It was specially suited for a trial plant also,

in the early days when a yield of six or eight lamps

to the horse-power was considered subject for

congratulation. The town being situated in the coal

region of Pennsylvania, good coal could then be

obtained there at seventy-five cents a ton.



The Sunbury generating plant consisted of an

Armington & Sims engine driving two small Edison

dynamos having a total capacity of about four hundred

lamps of 16 c.p. The indicating instruments

were of the crudest construction, consisting of two

voltmeters connected by "pressure wires" to the

centre of electrical distribution. One ammeter, for

measuring the quantity of current output, was interpolated

in the "neutral bus" or third-wire return

circuit to indicate when the load on the two machines

was out of balance. The circuits were opened and

closed by means of about half a dozen roughly made

plug-switches.[14] The "bus-bars" to receive the

current from the dynamos were made of No. 000 copper

line wire, straightened out and fastened to the wooden

sheathing of the station by iron staples without any

presence to insulation. Commenting upon this Mr.

W. S. Andrews, detailed from the central staff, says:

"The interior winding of the Sunbury station, including

the running of two three-wire feeders the entire

length of the building from back to front, the wiring

up of the dynamos and switchboard and all instruments,

together with bus-bars, etc.--in fact, all

labor and material used in the electrical wiring

installation--amounted to the sum of $90. I received

a rather sharp letter from the New York office

expostulating for this EXTRAVAGANT EXPENDITURE, and

stating that great economy must be observed in future!"

The street conductors were of the overhead pole-line

construction, and were installed by the construction

company that had been organized by Edison to build

and equip central stations. A special type of street

pole had been devised by him for the three-wire system.





[14] By reason of the experience gained at this station through

the use of these crude plug-switches, Mr. Edison started a competition

among a few of his assistants to devise something better.

The result was the invention of a "breakdown" switch by Mr.

W. S. Andrews, which was accepted by Mr. Edison as the best of

the devices suggested, and was developed and used for a great

many years afterward.





Supplementing the story of Mr. Andrews is that of

Lieut. F. J. Sprague, who also gives a curious glimpse

of the glorious uncertainties and vicissitudes of that

formative period. Mr. Sprague served on the jury at

the Crystal Palace Exhibition with Darwin's son--

the present Sir Horace--and after the tests were

ended left the Navy and entered Edison's service at

the suggestion of Mr. E. H. Johnson, who was Edison's

shrewd recruiting sergeant in those days: "I resigned

sooner than Johnson expected, and he had

me on his hands. Meanwhile he had called upon me

to make a report of the three-wire system, known in

England as the Hopkinson, both Dr. John Hopkinson

and Mr. Edison being independent inventors at

practically the same time. I reported on that, left

London, and landed in New York on the day of the

opening of the Brooklyn Bridge in 1883--May 24--

with a year's leave of absence.



"I reported at the office of Mr. Edison on Fifth

Avenue and told him I had seen Johnson. He looked

me over and said: `What did he promise you?' I

replied: `Twenty-five hundred dollars a year.' He

did not say much, but looked it. About that time

Mr. Andrews and I came together. On July 2d of that

year we were ordered to Sunbury, and to be ready to

start the station on the fourth. The electrical work

had to be done in forty-eight hours! Having travelled

around the world, I had cultivated an indifference

to any special difficulties of that kind. Mr.

Andrews and I worked in collaboration until the

night of the third. I think he was perhaps more

appreciative than I was of the discipline of the Edison

Construction Department, and thought it would be

well for us to wait until the morning of the fourth

before we started up. I said we were sent over to

get going, and insisted on starting up on the night

of the third. We had an Armington & Sims engine

with sight-feed oiler. I had never seen one, and did

not know how it worked, with the result that we soon

burned up the babbitt metal in the bearings and spent

a good part of the night getting them in order. The

next day Mr. Edison, Mr. Insull, and the chief

engineer of the construction department appeared on

the scene and wanted to know what had happened.

They found an engine somewhat loose in the bearings,

and there followed remarks which would not look

well in print. Andrews skipped from under; he

obeyed orders; I did not. But the plant ran, and it

was the first three-wire station in this country."



Seen from yet another angle, the worries of this

early work were not merely those of the men on the

"firing line." Mr. Insull, in speaking of this period,

says: "When it was found difficult to push the central-

station business owing to the lack of confidence

in its financial success, Edison decided to go into the

business of promoting and constructing central-station

plants, and he formed what was known as the

Thomas A. Edison Construction Department, which

he put me in charge of. The organization was crude,

the steam-engineering talent poor, and owing to the

impossibility of getting any considerable capital

subscribed, the plants were put in as cheaply as

possible. I believe that this construction department

was unkindly named the `Destruction Department.'

It served its purpose; never made any money; and I

had the unpleasant task of presiding at its obsequies."



On July 4th the Sunbury plant was put into commercial

operation by Edison, and he remained a week

studying its conditions and watching for any unforeseen

difficulty that might arise. Nothing happened,

however, to interfere with the successful running of

the station, and for twenty years thereafter the same

two dynamos continued to furnish light in Sunbury.

They were later used as reserve machines, and finally,

with the engine, retired from service as part of

the "Collection of Edisonia"; but they remain in

practically as good condition as when installed in

1883.



Sunbury was also provided with the first electro-

chemical meters used in the United States outside

New York City, so that it served also to accentuate

electrical practice in a most vital respect--namely,

the measurement of the electrical energy supplied to

customers. At this time and long after, all arc

lighting was done on a "flat rate" basis. The arc

lamp installed outside a customer's premises, or in

a circuit for public street lighting, burned so many

hours nightly, so many nights in the month; and was

paid for at that rate, subject to rebate for hours

when the lamp might be out through accident. The

early arc lamps were rated to require 9 to 10 amperes

of current, at 45 volts pressure each, receiving which

they were estimated to give 2000 c.p., which was arrived

at by adding together the light found at four

different positions, so that in reality the actual light

was about 500 c.p. Few of these data were ever

actually used, however; and it was all more or less a

matter of guesswork, although the central-station

manager, aiming to give good service, would naturally

see that the dynamos were so operated as to maintain

as steadily as possible the normal potential and current.

The same loose methods applied to the early

attempts to use electric motors on arc-lighting circuits,

and contracts were made based on the size of

the motor, the width of the connecting belt, or the

amount of power the customer thought he used--

never on the measurement of the electrical energy

furnished him.



Here again Edison laid the foundation of standard

practice. It is true that even down to the present

time the flat rate is applied to a great deal of

incandescent lighting, each lamp being charged for

individually according to its probable consumption

during each month. This may answer, perhaps, in a

small place where the manager can gauge pretty

closely from actual observation what each customer

does; but even then there are elements of risk and

waste; and obviously in a large city such a method

would soon be likely to result in financial disaster to

the plant. Edison held that the electricity sold must

be measured just like gas or water, and he proceeded

to develop a meter. There was infinite scepticism

around him on the subject, and while other inventors

were also giving the subject their thought, the public

took it for granted that anything so utterly intangible

as electricity, that could not be seen or weighed, and

only gave secondary evidence of itself at the exact

point of use, could not be brought to accurate regis-

tration. The general attitude of doubt was exemplified

by the incident in Mr. J. P. Morgan's office,

noted in the last chapter. Edison, however, had

satisfied himself that there were various ways of

accomplishing the task, and had determined that the

current should be measured on the premises of every

consumer. His electrolytic meter was very successful,

and was of widespread use in America and in Europe

until the perfection of mechanical meters by Elihu

Thomson and others brought that type into general

acceptance. Hence the Edison electrolytic meter is

no longer used, despite its excellent qualities. Houston

& Kennelly in their Electricity in Everyday Life

sum the matter up as follows: "The Edison chemical

meter is capable of giving fair measurements of the

amount of current passing. By reason, however, of

dissatisfaction caused from the inability of customers

to read the indications of the meter, it has in later

years, to a great extent, been replaced by registering

meters that can be read by the customer."



The principle employed in the Edison electrolytic

meter is that which exemplifies the power of electricity

to decompose a chemical substance. In other

words it is a deposition bath, consisting of a glass cell

in which two plates of chemically pure zinc are dipped

in a solution of zinc sulphate. When the lights or

motors in the circuit are turned on, and a certain

definite small portion of the current is diverted to

flow through the meter, from the positive plate to the

negative plate, the latter increases in weight by receiving

a deposit of metallic zinc; the positive plate

meantime losing in weight by the metal thus carried

away from it. This difference in weight is a very

exact measure of the quantity of electricity, or number

of ampere-hours, that have, so to speak, passed

through the cell, and hence of the whole consumption

in the circuit. The amount thus due from the customer

is ascertained by removing the cell, washing

and drying the plates, and weighing them in a chemical

balance. Associated with this simple form of

apparatus were various ingenious details and refinements

to secure regularity of operation, freedom from

inaccuracy, and immunity from such tampering as

would permit theft of current or damage. As the

freezing of the zinc sulphate solution in cold weather

would check its operation, Edison introduced, for

example, into the meter an incandescent lamp and

a thermostat so arranged that when the temperature

fell to a certain point, or rose above another point, it

was cut in or out; and in this manner the meter

could be kept from freezing. The standard Edison

meter practice was to remove the cells once a month

to the meter-room of the central-station company

for examination, another set being substituted. The

meter was cheap to manufacture and install, and not

at all liable to get out of order.



In December, 1888, Mr. W. J. Jenks read an interesting

paper before the American Institute of Electrical

Engineers on the six years of practical experience

had up to that time with the meter, then more generally

in use than any other. It appears from the

paper that twenty-three Edison stations were then

equipped with 5187 meters, which were relied upon

for billing the monthly current consumption of

87,856 lamps and 350 motors of 1000 horse-power

total. This represented about 75 per cent. of the

entire lamp capacity of the stations. There was an

average cost per lamp for meter operation of twenty-

two cents a year, and each meter took care of an

average of seventeen lamps. It is worthy of note,

as to the promptness with which the Edison stations

became paying properties, that four of the metered

stations were earning upward of 15 per cent. on their

capital stock; three others between 8 and 10 per cent.;

eight between 5 and 8 per cent.; the others having

been in operation too short a time to show definite

results, although they also went quickly to a dividend

basis. Reports made in the discussion at the meeting

by engineers showed the simplicity and success

of the meter. Mr. C. L. Edgar, of the Boston Edison

system, stated that he had 800 of the meters in service

cared for by two men and three boys, the latter

employed in collecting the meter cells; the total cost

being perhaps $2500 a year. Mr. J. W. Lieb wrote

from Milan, Italy, that he had in use on the Edison

system there 360 meters ranging from 350 ampere-

hours per month up to 30,000.



In this connection it should be mentioned that

the Association of Edison Illuminating Companies

in the same year adopted resolutions unanimously to

the effect that the Edison meter was accurate, and

that its use was not expensive for stations above

one thousand lights; and that the best financial

results were invariably secured in a station selling

current by meter. Before the same association, at

its meeting in September, 1898, at Sault Ste. Marie,

Mr. C. S. Shepard read a paper on the meter practice

of the New York Edison Company, giving data as to

the large number of Edison meters in use and the

transition to other types, of which to-day the company

has several on its circuits: "Until October,

1896, the New York Edison Company metered its

current in consumer's premises exclusively by the

old-style chemical meters, of which there were

connected on that date 8109. It was then determined

to purchase no more." Mr. Shepard went on to

state that the chemical meters were gradually displaced,

and that on September 1, 1898, there were on

the system 5619 mechanical and 4874 chemical. The

meter continued in general service during 1899, and

probably up to the close of the century.



Mr. Andrews relates a rather humorous meter story

of those early days: "The meter man at Sunbury was

a firm and enthusiastic believer in the correctness of

the Edison meter, having personally verified its reading

many times by actual comparison of lamp-hours.

One day, on making out a customer's bill, his confidence

received a severe shock, for the meter reading

showed a consumption calling for a charge of over

$200, whereas he knew that the light actually used

should not cost more than one-quarter of that amount.

He weighed and reweighed the meter plates, and pursued

every line of investigation imaginable, but all

in vain. He felt he was up against it, and that perhaps

another kind of a job would suit him better.

Once again he went to the customer's meter to look

around, when a small piece of thick wire on the floor

caught his eye. The problem was solved. He sud-

denly remembered that after weighing the plates he

went and put them in the customer's meter; but the

wire attached to one of the plates was too long to

go in the meter, and he had cut it off. He picked up

the piece of wire, took it to the station, weighed it

carefully, and found that it accounted for about $150

worth of electricity, which was the amount of the

difference."



Edison himself is, however, the best repertory of

stories when it comes to the difficulties of that early

period, in connection with metering the current and

charging for it. He may be quoted at length as

follows: "When we started the station at Pearl

Street, in September, 1882, we were not very

commercial. We put many customers on, but did not

make out many bills. We were more interested in

the technical condition of the station than in the

commercial part. We had meters in which there

were two bottles of liquid. To prevent these electrolytes

from freezing we had in each meter a strip

of metal. When it got very cold the metal would

contract and close a circuit, and throw a lamp into

circuit inside the meter. The heat from this lamp

would prevent the liquid from freezing, so that the

meter could go on doing its duty. The first cold day

after starting the station, people began to come in

from their offices, especially down in Front Street

and Water Street, saying the meter was on fire. We

received numerous telephone messages about it.

Some had poured water on it, and others said: `Send

a man right up to put it out.'



"After the station had been running several months

and was technically a success, we began to look after

the financial part. We started to collect some bills;

but we found that our books were kept badly, and

that the person in charge, who was no business man,

had neglected that part of it. In fact, he did not

know anything about the station, anyway. So I got

the directors to permit me to hire a man to run the

station. This was Mr. Chinnock, who was then

superintendent of the Metropolitan Telephone Company

of New York. I knew Chinnock to be square and of

good business ability, and induced him to leave his

job. I made him a personal guarantee, that if he

would take hold of the station and put it on a

commercial basis, and pay 5 per cent. on $600,000, I

would give him $10,000 out of my own pocket. He

took hold, performed the feat, and I paid him the

$10,000. I might remark in this connection that

years afterward I applied to the Edison Electric

Light Company asking them if they would not like

to pay me this money, as it was spent when I was

very hard up and made the company a success, and

was the foundation of their present prosperity. They

said they `were sorry'--that is, `Wall Street sorry'--

and refused to pay it. This shows what a nice, genial,

generous lot of people they have over in Wall Street.



"Chinnock had a great deal of trouble getting the

customers straightened out. I remember one man

who had a saloon on Nassau Street. He had had his

lights burning for two or three months. It was in

June, and Chinnock put in a bill for $20; July for

$20; August about $28; September about $35. Of

course the nights were getting longer. October about

$40; November about $45. Then the man called

Chinnock up. He said: `I want to see you about

my electric-light bill.' Chinnock went up to see him.

He said: `Are you the manager of this electric-light

plant?' Chinnock said: `I have the honor.' `Well,'

he said, my bill has gone from $20 up to $28, $35,

$45. I want you to understand, young fellow, that

my limit is $60.'



"After Chinnock had had all this trouble due to

the incompetency of the previous superintendent, a

man came in and said to him: `Did Mr. Blank have

charge of this station?' `Yes.' `Did he know anything

about running a station like this?' Chinnock

said: `Does he KNOW anything about running a station

like this? No, sir. He doesn't even suspect anything.'



"One day Chinnock came to me and said: `I have

a new customer.' I said: `What is it?' He said:

`I have a fellow who is going to take two hundred

and fifty lights.' I said: `What for?' `He has a

place down here in a top loft, and has got two hundred

and fifty barrels of "rotgut" whiskey. He puts a

light down in the barrel and lights it up, and it ages

the whiskey.' I met Chinnock several weeks after,

and said: `How is the whiskey man getting along?'

`It's all right; he is paying his bill. It fixes the

whiskey and takes the shudder right out of it.' Somebody

went and took out a patent on this idea later.



"In the second year we put the Stock Exchange on

the circuits of the station, but were very fearful that

there would be a combination of heavy demand and

a dark day, and that there would be an overloaded

station. We had an index like a steam-gauge, called

an ampere-meter, to indicate the amount of current

going out. I was up at 65 Fifth Avenue one afternoon.

A sudden black cloud came up, and I telephoned

to Chinnock and asked him about the load.

He said: `We are up to the muzzle, and everything is

running all right.' By-and-by it became so thick we

could not see across the street. I telephoned again,

and felt something would happen, but fortunately it

did not. I said to Chinnock: `How is it now?' He

replied: `Everything is red-hot, and the ampere-

meter has made seventeen revolutions.' "



In 1883 no such fittings as "fixture insulators" were

known. It was the common practice to twine the

electric wires around the disused gas-fixtures, fasten

them with tape or string, and connect them to lamp-

sockets screwed into attachments under the gas-

burners--elaborated later into what was known as

the "combination fixture." As a result it was no

uncommon thing to see bright sparks snapping between

the chandelier and the lighting wires during

a sharp thunder-storm. A startling manifestation of

this kind happened at Sunbury, when the vivid display

drove nervous guests of the hotel out into the

street, and the providential storm led Mr. Luther

Stieringer to invent the "insulating joint." This

separated the two lighting systems thoroughly, went into

immediate service, and is universally used to-day.



Returning to the more specific subject of pioneer

plants of importance, that at Brockton must be considered

for a moment, chiefly for the reason that the

city was the first in the world to possess an Edison

station distributing current through an underground

three-wire network of conductors--the essentially

modern contemporaneous practice, standard twenty-

five years later. It was proposed to employ pole-line

construction with overhead wires, and a party of

Edison engineers drove about the town in an open

barouche with a blue-print of the circuits and streets

spread out on their knees, to determine how much

tree-trimming would be necessary. When they came

to some heavily shaded spots, the fine trees were

marked "T" to indicate that the work in getting

through them would be "tough." Where the trees

were sparse and the foliage was thin, the same cheerful

band of vandals marked the spots "E" to indicate

that there it would be "easy" to run the wires. In

those days public opinion was not so alive as now

to the desirability of preserving shade-trees, and of

enhancing the beauty of a city instead of destroying it.

Brockton had a good deal of pride in its fine trees,

and a strong sentiment was very soon aroused against

the mutilation proposed so thoughtlessly. The investors

in the enterprise were ready and anxious to

meet the extra cost of putting the wires underground.

Edison's own wishes were altogether for the use of

the methods he had so carefully devised; and hence

that bustling home of shoe manufacture was spared

this infliction of more overhead wires.



The station equipment at Brockton consisted at

first of three dynamos, one of which was so arranged

as to supply both sides of the system during light

loads by a breakdown switch connection. This

arrangement interfered with correct meter registra-

tion, as the meters on one side of the system registered

backward during the hours in which the combination

was employed. Hence, after supplying an all-night

customer whose lamps were on one side of the circuits,

the company might be found to owe him some

thing substantial in the morning. Soon after the

station went into operation this ingenious plan was

changed, and the third dynamo was replaced by two

others. The Edison construction department took

entire charge of the installation of the plant, and the

formal opening was attended on October 1, 1883, by

Mr. Edison, who then remained a week in ceaseless

study and consultation over the conditions developed

by this initial three-wire underground plant. Some

idea of the confidence inspired by the fame of Edison

at this period is shown by the fact that the first

theatre ever lighted from a central station by

incandescent lamps was designed this year, and opened in

1884 at Brockton with an equipment of three hundred

lamps. The theatre was never piped for gas! It was

also from the Brockton central station that current

was first supplied to a fire-engine house--another

display of remarkably early belief in the trustworthiness

of the service, under conditions where continuity

of lighting was vital. The building was equipped in

such a manner that the striking of the fire-alarm

would light every lamp in the house automatically

and liberate the horses. It was at this central station

that Lieutenant Sprague began his historic work on

the electric motor; and here that another distinguished

engineer and inventor, Mr. H. Ward Leonard,

installed the meters and became meter man, in order

that he might study in every intimate detail the

improvements and refinements necessary in that branch

of the industry.



The authors are indebted for these facts and some

other data embodied in this book to Mr. W. J. Jenks,

who as manager of this plant here made his debut in

the Edison ranks. He had been connected with local

telephone interests, but resigned to take active charge

of this plant, imbibing quickly the traditional Edison

spirit, working hard all day and sleeping in the station

at night on a cot brought there for that purpose. It

was a time of uninterrupted watchfulness. The difficulty

of obtaining engineers in those days to run the

high-speed engines (three hundred and fifty revolutions

per minute) is well illustrated by an amusing

incident in the very early history of the station. A

locomotive engineer had been engaged, as it was supposed

he would not be afraid of anything. One evening

there came a sudden flash of fire and a spluttering,

sizzling noise. There had been a short-circuit on

the copper mains in the station. The fireman hid

behind the boiler and the engineer jumped out of the

window. Mr. Sprague realized the trouble, quickly

threw off the current and stopped the engine.



Mr. Jenks relates another humorous incident in

connection with this plant: "One night I heard a

knock at the office door, and on opening it saw two

well-dressed ladies, who asked if they might be shown

through. I invited them in, taking them first to the

boiler-room, where I showed them the coal-pile, explaining

that this was used to generate steam in the

boiler. We then went to the dynamo-room, where

I pointed out the machines converting the steam-

power into electricity, appearing later in the form of

light in the lamps. After that they were shown the

meters by which the consumption of current was

measured. They appeared to be interested, and I

proceeded to enter upon a comparison of coal made

into gas or burned under a boiler to be converted

into electricity. The ladies thanked me effusively

and brought their visit to a close. As they were about

to go through the door, one of them turned to me

and said: `We have enjoyed this visit very much,

but there is one question we would like to ask: What

is it that you make here?' "



The Brockton station was for a long time a show

plant of the Edison company, and had many distinguished

visitors, among them being Prof. Elihu

Thomson, who was present at the opening, and Sir

W. H. Preece, of London. The engineering methods

pursued formed the basis of similar installations in

Lawrence, Massachusetts, in November, 1883; in

Fall River, Massachusetts, in December, 1883; and

in Newburgh, New York, the following spring.



Another important plant of this period deserves

special mention, as it was the pioneer in the lighting

of large spaces by incandescent lamps. This installation

of five thousand lamps on the three-wire system

was made to illuminate the buildings at the Louisville,

Kentucky, Exposition in 1883, and, owing to the careful

surveys, calculations, and preparations of H. M.

Byllesby and the late Luther Stieringer, was completed

and in operation within six weeks after

the placing of the order. The Jury of Awards,



in presenting four medals to the Edison company,

took occasion to pay a high compliment to the

efficiency of the system. It has been thought by

many that the magnificent success of this plant

did more to stimulate the growth of the incandescent

lighting business than any other event in

the history of the Edison company. It was literally

the beginning of the electrical illumination of American

Expositions, carried later to such splendid displays

as those of the Chicago World's Fair in 1893,

Buffalo in 1901, and St. Louis in 1904.



Thus the art was set going in the United States

under many difficulties, but with every sign of coming

triumph. Reference has already been made to

the work abroad in Paris and London. The first

permanent Edison station in Europe was that at

Milan, Italy, for which the order was given as early

as May, 1882, by an enterprising syndicate. Less

than a year later, March 3, 1883, the installation was

ready and was put in operation, the Theatre Santa

Radegonda having been pulled down and a new central-

station building erected in its place--probably

the first edifice constructed in Europe for the

specific purpose of incandescent lighting. Here

"Jumbos" were installed from time to time, until at

last there were no fewer than ten of them; and current

was furnished to customers with a total of nearly

ten thousand lamps connected to the mains. This

pioneer system was operated continuously until

February 9, 1900, or for a period of about seventeen

years, when the sturdy old machines, still in excellent

condition, were put out of service, so that a larger

plant could be installed to meet the demand. This

new plant takes high-tension polyphase current from

a water-power thirty or forty miles away at Paderno,

on the river Adda, flowing from the Apennines;

but delivers low-tension direct current for distribution

to the regular Edison three-wire system throughout

Milan.



About the same time that southern Europe was

thus opened up to the new system, South America

came into line, and the first Edison central station

there was installed at Santiago, Chile, in the summer of

1883, under the supervision of Mr. W. N. Stewart.

This was the result of the success obtained with small

isolated plants, leading to the formation of an Edison

company. It can readily be conceived that at such

an extreme distance from the source of supply of

apparatus the plant was subject to many peculiar

difficulties from the outset, of which Mr. Stewart

speaks as follows: "I made an exhibition of the

`Jumbo' in the theatre at Santiago, and on the first

evening, when it was filled with the aristocracy of the

city, I discovered to my horror that the binding wire

around the armature was slowly stripping off and

going to pieces. We had no means of boring out the

field magnets, and we cut grooves in them. I think

the machine is still running (1907). The station

went into operation soon after with an equipment of

eight Edison `K' dynamos with certain conditions

inimical to efficiency, but which have not hindered

the splendid expansion of the local system. With

those eight dynamos we had four belts between each

engine and the dynamo. The steam pressure was

limited to seventy-five pounds per square inch. We

had two-wire underground feeders, sent without any

plans or specifications for their installation. The

station had neither voltmeter nor ammeter. The

current pressure was regulated by a galvanometer.

We were using coal costing $12 a ton, and were paid

for our light in currency worth fifty cents on the

dollar. The only thing I can be proud of in connection

with the plant is the fact that I did not design

it, that once in a while we made out to pay its operating

expenses, and that occasionally we could run it

for three months without a total breakdown."



It was not until 1885 that the first Edison station

in Germany was established; but the art was still

very young, and the plant represented pioneer lighting

practice in the Empire. The station at Berlin

comprised five boilers, and six vertical steam-engines

driving by belts twelve Edison dynamos, each of

about fifty-five horse-power capacity. A model of

this station is preserved in the Deutschen Museum at

Munich. In the bulletin of the Berlin Electricity

Works for May, 1908, it is said with regard to the

events that led up to the creation of the system, as

noted already at the Rathenau celebration: "The

year 1881 was a mile-stone in the history of the Allgemeine

Elektricitaets Gesellschaft. The International

Electrical Exposition at Paris was intended to place

before the eyes of the civilized world the achievements

of the century. Among the exhibits of that

Exposition was the Edison system of incandescent

lighting. IT BECAME THE BASIS OF MODERN HEAVY CURRENT

TECHNICS." The last phrase is italicized as being a

happy and authoritative description, as well as a

tribute.



This chapter would not be complete if it failed to

include some reference to a few of the earlier isolated

plants of a historic character. Note has already been

made of the first Edison plants afloat on the Jeannette

and Columbia, and the first commercial plant in the

New York lithographic establishment. The first mill

plant was placed in the woollen factory of James

Harrison at Newburgh, New York, about September

15, 1881. A year later, Mr. Harrison wrote with some

pride: "I believe my mill was the first lighted with

your electric light, and therefore may be called No. 1.

Besides being job No. 1 it is a No. 1 job, and a No. 1

light, being better and cheaper than gas and absolutely

safe as to fire." The first steam-yacht lighted

by incandescent lamps was James Gordon Bennett's

Namouna, equipped early in 1882 with a plant for

one hundred and twenty lamps of eight candlepower,

which remained in use there many years

afterward.



The first Edison plant in a hotel was started in

October, 1881, at the Blue Mountain House in the

Adirondacks, and consisted of two "Z" dynamos

with a complement of eight and sixteen candle lamps.

The hotel is situated at an elevation of thirty-five

hundred feet above the sea, and was at that time

forty miles from the railroad. The machinery was

taken up in pieces on the backs of mules from the

foot of the mountain. The boilers were fired by wood,

as the economical transportation of coal was a physical

impossibility. For a six-hour run of the plant one-

quarter of a cord of wood was required, at a cost of

twenty-five cents per cord.



The first theatre in the United States to be lighted

by an Edison isolated plant was the Bijou Theatre,

Boston. The installation of boilers, engines, dynamos,

wiring, switches, fixtures, three stage regulators,

and six hundred and fifty lamps, was completed in

eleven days after receipt of the order, and the plant

was successfully operated at the opening of the

theatre, on December 12, 1882.



The first plant to be placed on a United States

steamship was the one consisting of an Edison "Z"

dynamo and one hundred and twenty eight-candle

lamps installed on the Fish Commission's steamer

Albatross in 1883. The most interesting feature of

this installation was the employment of special deep-

sea lamps, supplied with current through a cable

nine hundred and forty feet in length, for the purpose

of alluring fish. By means of the brilliancy of the

lamps marine animals in the lower depths were attracted

and then easily ensnared.

