




CHAPTER XVI



THE FIRST EDISON CENTRAL STATION



A NOTED inventor once said at the end of a lifetime

of fighting to defend his rights, that he

found there were three stages in all great inventions:

the first, in which people said the thing could not

be done; the second, in which they said anybody

could do it; and the third, in which they said it had

always been done by everybody. In his central-

station work Edison has had very much this kind of

experience; for while many of his opponents came to

acknowledge the novelty and utility of his plans, and

gave him unstinted praise, there are doubtless others

who to this day profess to look upon him merely as

an adapter. How different the view of so eminent a

scientist as Lord Kelvin was, may be appreciated

from his remark when in later years, in reply to the

question why some one else did not invent so obvious

and simple a thing as the Feeder System, he said:

"The only answer I can think of is that no one else

was Edison."



Undaunted by the attitude of doubt and the predictions

of impossibility, Edison had pushed on until

he was now able to realize all his ideas as to the establishment

of a central station in the work that culminated

in New York City in 1882. After he had

conceived the broad plan, his ambition was to create

the initial plant on Manhattan Island, where it would

be convenient of access for watching its operation,

and where the demonstration of its practicability

would have influence in financial circles. The first

intention was to cover a district extending from

Canal Street on the north to Wall Street on the south;

but Edison soon realized that this territory was too

extensive for the initial experiment, and he decided

finally upon the district included between Wall,

Nassau, Spruce, and Ferry streets, Peck Slip and the

East River, an area nearly a square mile in extent.

One of the preliminary steps taken to enable him to

figure on such a station and system was to have men

go through this district on various days and note the

number of gas jets burning at each hour up to two or

three o'clock in the morning. The next step was to

divide the region into a number of sub-districts and

institute a house-to-house canvass to ascertain precisely

the data and conditions pertinent to the project.

When the canvass was over, Edison knew exactly

how many gas jets there were in every building in

the entire district, the average hours of burning, and

the cost of light; also every consumer of power, and

the quantity used; every hoistway to which an

electric motor could be applied; and other details too

numerous to mention, such as related to the gas itself,

the satisfaction of the customers, and the limitations

of day and night demand. All this information

was embodied graphically in large maps of the district,

by annotations in colored inks; and Edison thus

could study the question with every detail before

him. Such a reconnaissance, like that of a coming

field of battle, was invaluable, and may help give a

further idea of the man's inveterate care for the

minutiae of things.



The laboratory note-books of this period--1878-

80, more particularly--show an immense amount of

calculation by Edison and his chief mathematician,

Mr. Upton, on conductors for the distribution of current

over large areas, and then later in the district

described. With the results of this canvass before

them, the sizes of the main conductors to be laid

throughout the streets of this entire territory were

figured, block by block; and the results were then

placed on the map. These data revealed the fact

that the quantity of copper required for the main

conductors would be exceedingly large and costly;

and, if ever, Edison was somewhat dismayed. But

as usual this apparently insurmountable difficulty

only spurred him on to further effort. It was but a

short time thereafter that he solved the knotty problem

by an invention mentioned in a previous chapter.

This is known as the "feeder and main" system, for

which he signed the application for a patent on

August 4, 1880. As this invention effected a saving

of seven-eighths of the cost of the chief conductors

in a straight multiple arc system, the mains for the

first district were refigured, and enormous new maps

were made, which became the final basis of actual

installation, as they were subsequently enlarged by

the addition of every proposed junction-box, bridge

safety-catch box, and street-intersection box in the

whole area.



When this patent, after protracted fighting, was

sustained by Judge Green in 1893, the Electrical

Engineer remarked that the General Electric Company

"must certainly feel elated" because of its

importance; and the journal expressed its fear that

although the specifications and claims related only

to the maintenance of uniform pressure of current

on lighting circuits, the owners might naturally seek

to apply it also to feeders used in the electric-railway

work already so extensive. At this time, however,

the patent had only about a year of life left, owing

to the expiration of the corresponding English patent.

The fact that thirteen years had elapsed gives a vivid

idea of the ordeal involved in sustaining a patent and

the injustice to the inventor, while there is obviously

hardship to those who cannot tell from any decision

of the court whether they are infringing or not. It

is interesting to note that the preparation for hearing

this case in New Jersey was accompanied by models

to show the court exactly the method and its economy,

as worked out in comparison with what is known as

the "tree system" of circuits--the older alternative

way of doing it. As a basis of comparison, a district

of thirty-six city blocks in the form of a square was

assumed. The power station was placed at the centre

of the square; each block had sixteen consumers

using fifteen lights each. Conductors were run from

the station to supply each of the four quarters of the

district with light. In one example the "feeder"

system was used; in the other the "tree." With

these models were shown two cubes which represented

one one-hundredth of the actual quantity of

copper required for each quarter of the district by

the two-wire tree system as compared with the feeder

system under like conditions. The total weight

of copper for the four quarter districts by the tree

system was 803,250 pounds, but when the feeder

system was used it was only 128,739 pounds! This

was a reduction from $23.24 per lamp for copper

to $3.72 per lamp. Other models emphasized this

extraordinary contrast. At the time Edison was

doing this work on economizing in conductors, much

of the criticism against him was based on the assumed

extravagant use of copper implied in the obvious

"tree" system, and it was very naturally said

that there was not enough copper in the world to

supply his demands. It is true that the modern

electrical arts have been a great stimulator of copper

production, now taking a quarter of all made; yet

evidently but for such inventions as this such arts

could not have come into existence at all, or else

in growing up they would have forced copper to

starvation prices.[11]





[11] For description of feeder patent see Appendix.





It should be borne in mind that from the outset

Edison had determined upon installing underground

conductors as the only permanent and satisfactory

method for the distribution of current from central

stations in cities; and that at Menlo Park he laid out

and operated such a system with about four hundred

and twenty-five lamps. The underground system

there was limited to the immediate vicinity of the

laboratory and was somewhat crude, as well as much

less complicated than would be the network of over

eighty thousand lineal feet, which he calculated to be

required for the underground circuits in the first

district of New York City. At Menlo Park no effort

was made for permanency; no provision was needed

in regard to occasional openings of the street for

various purposes; no new customers were to be connected

from time to time to the mains, and no repairs

were within contemplation. In New York the question

of permanency was of paramount importance,

and the other contingencies were sure to arise as

well as conditions more easy to imagine than to forestall.

These problems were all attacked in a resolute,

thoroughgoing manner, and one by one solved by

the invention of new and unprecedented devices that

were adequate for the purposes of the time, and which

are embodied in apparatus of slight modification in

use up to the present day.



Just what all this means it is hard for the present

generation to imagine. New York and all the other

great cities in 1882, and for some years thereafter,

were burdened and darkened by hideous masses of

overhead wires carried on ugly wooden poles along

all the main thoroughfares. One after another rival

telegraph and telephone, stock ticker, burglar-alarm,

and other companies had strung their circuits without

any supervision or restriction; and these wires in all

conditions of sag or decay ramified and crisscrossed in

every direction, often hanging broken and loose-ended

for months, there being no official compulsion to

remove any dead wire. None of these circuits carried

dangerous currents; but the introduction of the arc

light brought an entirely new menace in the use of

pressures that were even worse than the bully of the

West who "kills on sight," because this kindred peril

was invisible, and might lurk anywhere. New poles

were put up, and the lighting circuits on them, with

but a slight insulation of cotton impregnated with

some "weather-proof" compound, straggled all over

the city exposed to wind and rain and accidental

contact with other wires, or with the metal of buildings.

So many fatalities occurred that the insulated

wire used, called "underwriters," because approved

by the insurance bodies, became jocularly known as

"undertakers," and efforts were made to improve its

protective qualities. Then came the overhead circuits

for distributing electrical energy to motors for

operating elevators, driving machinery, etc., and

these, while using a lower, safer potential, were

proportionately larger. There were no wires underground.

Morse had tried that at the very beginning of electrical

application, in telegraphy, and all agreed that

renewals of the experiment were at once costly and

foolish. At last, in cities like New York, what may

be styled generically the "overhead system" of wires

broke down under its own weight; and various

methods of underground conductors were tried, hastened

in many places by the chopping down of poles

and wires as the result of some accident that stirred

the public indignation. One typical tragic scene was

that in New York, where, within sight of the City

Hall, a lineman was killed at his work on the arc

light pole, and his body slowly roasted before the gaze

of the excited populace, which for days afterward

dropped its silver and copper coin into the alms-box

nailed to the fatal pole for the benefit of his family.

Out of all this in New York came a board of electrical

control, a conduit system, and in the final analysis

the Public Service Commission, that is credited to

Governor Hughes as the furthest development of

utility corporation control.



The "road to yesterday" back to Edison and his

insistence on underground wires is a long one, but

the preceding paragraph traces it. Even admitting

that the size and weight of his low-tension conductors

necessitated putting them underground, this argues

nothing against the propriety and sanity of his

methods. He believed deeply and firmly in the

analogy between electrical supply and that for water

and gas, and pointed to the trite fact that nobody

hoisted the water and gas mains into the air on stilts,

and that none of the pressures were inimical to human

safety. The arc-lighting methods were unconsciously

and unwittingly prophetic of the latter-day

long-distance transmissions at high pressure that,

electrically, have placed the energy of Niagara at

the command of Syracuse and Utica, and have put

the power of the falling waters of the Sierras at the

disposal of San Francisco, two hundred miles away.

But within city limits overhead wires, with such

space-consuming potentials, are as fraught with

mischievous peril to the public as the dynamite stored

by a nonchalant contractor in the cellar of a schoolhouse.

As an offset, then, to any tendency to depreciate

the intrinsic value of Edison's lighting work,

let the claim be here set forth modestly and subject

to interference, that he was the father of under-

ground wires in America, and by his example outlined

the policy now dominant in every city of the

first rank. Even the comment of a cynic in regard

to electrical development may be accepted: "Some

electrical companies wanted all the air; others apparently

had use for all the water; Edison only asked

for the earth."



The late Jacob Hess, a famous New York Republican

politician, was a member of the commission

appointed to put the wires underground in New York

City, in the "eighties." He stated that when the

commission was struggling with the problem, and

examining all kinds of devices and plans, patented

and unpatented, for which fabulous sums were often

asked, the body turned to Edison in its perplexity

and asked for advice. Edison said: "All you have

to do, gentlemen, is to insulate your wires, draw them

through the cheapest thing on earth--iron pipe--run

your pipes through channels or galleries under the

street, and you've got the whole thing done." This

was practically the system adopted and in use to

this day. What puzzled the old politician was that

Edison would accept nothing for his advice.



Another story may also be interpolated here as to

the underground work done in New York for the first

Edison station. It refers to the "man higher up,"

although the phrase had not been coined in those days

of lower public morality. That a corporation should

be "held up" was accepted philosophically by the

corporation as one of the unavoidable incidents of its

business; and if the corporation "got back" by securing

some privilege without paying for it, the public

was ready to condone if not applaud. Public utilities

were in the making, and no one in particular had a

keen sense of what was right or what was wrong, in

the hard, practical details of their development. Edison

tells this illuminating story: "When I was laying

tubes in the streets of New York, the office received

notice from the Commissioner of Public Works to

appear at his office at a certain hour. I went up

there with a gentleman to see the Commissioner,

H. O. Thompson. On arrival he said to me: `You

are putting down these tubes. The Department of

Public Works requires that you should have five inspectors

to look after this work, and that their salary

shall be $5 per day, payable at the end of each week.

Good-morning.' I went out very much crestfallen,

thinking I would be delayed and harassed in the work

which I was anxious to finish, and was doing night

and day. We watched patiently for those inspectors

to appear. The only appearance they made was to

draw their pay Saturday afternoon."



Just before Christmas in 1880--December 17--as

an item for the silk stocking of Father Knickerbocker

--the Edison Electric Illuminating Company of New

York was organized. In pursuance of the policy adhered

to by Edison, a license was issued to it for the

exclusive use of the system in that territory--Manhattan

Island--in consideration of a certain sum of

money and a fixed percentage of its capital in stock

for the patent rights. Early in 1881 it was altogether

a paper enterprise, but events moved swiftly as narrated

already, and on June 25, 1881, the first "Jumbo"

prototype of the dynamo-electric machines to gen-

erate current at the Pearl Street station was put

through its paces before being shipped to Paris to

furnish new sensations to the flaneur of the boulevards.

A number of the Edison officers and employees

assembled at Goerck Street to see this "gigantic"

machine go into action, and watched its performance

with due reverence all through the night until five

o'clock on Sunday morning, when it respected the

conventionalities by breaking a shaft and suspending

further tests. After this dynamo was shipped

to France, and its successors to England for the Holborn

Viaduct plant, Edison made still further improvements

in design, increasing capacity and economy,

and then proceeded vigorously with six machines for

Pearl Street.



An ideal location for any central station is at the

very centre of the district served. It may be questioned

whether it often goes there. In the New York

first district the nearest property available was a

double building at Nos. 255 and 257 Pearl Street,

occupying a lot so by 100 feet. It was four stories

high, with a fire-wall dividing it into two equal parts.

One of these parts was converted for the uses of the

station proper, and the other was used as a tube-shop

by the underground construction department, as well

as for repair-shops, storage, etc. Those were the days

when no one built a new edifice for station purposes;

that would have been deemed a fantastic extravagance.

One early station in New York for arc lighting

was an old soap-works whose well-soaked floors did

not need much additional grease to render them

choice fuel for the inevitable flames. In this Pearl

Street instance, the building, erected originally for

commercial uses, was quite incapable of sustaining

the weight of the heavy dynamos and steam-engines

to be installed on the second floor; so the old flooring

was torn out and a new one of heavy girders supported

by stiff columns was substituted. This heavy construction,

more familiar nowadays, and not unlike

the supporting metal structure of the Manhattan

Elevated road, was erected independent of the enclosing

walls, and occupied the full width of 257 Pearl

Street, and about three-quarters of its depth. This

change in the internal arrangements did not at all

affect the ugly external appearance, which did little to

suggest the stately and ornate stations since put up

by the New York Edison Company, the latest occupying

whole city blocks.



Of this episode Edison gives the following account:

"While planning for my first New York station--

Pearl Street--of course, I had no real estate, and

from lack of experience had very little knowledge of

its cost in New York; so I assumed a rather large,

liberal amount of it to plan my station on. It

occurred to me one day that before I went too far with

my plans I had better find out what real estate was

worth. In my original plan I had 200 by 200 feet.

I thought that by going down on a slum street near

the water-front I would get some pretty cheap property.

So I picked out the worst dilapidated street

there was, and found I could only get two buildings,

each 25 feet front, one 100 feet deep and the other

85 feet deep. I thought about $10,000 each would

cover it; but when I got the price I found that they

wanted $75,000 for one and $80,000 for the other.

Then I was compelled to change my plans and go upward

in the air where real estate was cheap. I

cleared out the building entirely to the walls and

built my station of structural ironwork, running it

up high."



Into this converted structure was put the most

complete steam plant obtainable, together with all

the mechanical and engineering adjuncts bearing

upon economical and successful operation. Being in

a narrow street and a congested district, the plant

needed special facilities for the handling of coal and

ashes, as well as for ventilation and forced draught.

All of these details received Mr. Edison's personal

care and consideration on the spot, in addition to the

multitude of other affairs demanding his thought.

Although not a steam or mechanical engineer, his

quick grasp of principles and omnivorous reading had

soon supplied the lack of training; nor had he forgotten

the practical experience picked up as a boy

on the locomotives of the Grand Trunk road. It is

to be noticed as a feature of the plant, in common

with many of later construction, that it was placed

well away from the water's edge, and equipped with

non-condensing engines; whereas the modern plant

invariably seeks the bank of a river or lake for the

purpose of a generous supply of water for its

condensing engines or steam-turbines. These are among

the refinements of practice coincidental with the advance

of the art.



At the award of the John Fritz gold medal in April,

1909, to Charles T. Porter for his work in advancing

the knowledge of steam-engineering, and for improvements

in engine construction, Mr. Frank J. Sprague

spoke on behalf of the American Institute of Electrical

Engineers of the debt of electricity to the high-speed

steam-engine. He recalled the fact that at the

French Exposition of 1867 Mr. Porter installed two

Porter-Allen engines to drive electric alternating-current

generators for supplying current to primitive

lighthouse apparatus. While the engines were not

directly coupled to the dynamos, it was a curious

fact that the piston speeds and number of revolutions

were what is common to-day in isolated direct-coupled

plants. In the dozen years following Mr. Porter built

many engines with certain common characteristics--

i.e., high piston speed and revolutions, solid engine

bed, and babbitt-metal bearings; but there was no

electric driving until 1880, when Mr. Porter installed

a high-speed engine for Edison at his laboratory in

Menlo Park. Shortly after this he was invited to

construct for the Edison Pearl Street station the first

of a series of engines for so-called "steam-dynamos,"

each independently driven by a direct-coupled engine.

Mr. Sprague compared the relations thus established

between electricity and the high-speed engine not to

those of debtor and creditor, but rather to those of

partners--an industrial marriage--one of the most

important in the engineering world. Here were two

machines destined to be joined together, economizing

space, enhancing economy, augmenting capacity, reducing

investment, and increasing dividends.



While rapid progress was being made in this and

other directions, the wheels of industry were hum-

ming merrily at the Edison Tube Works, for over

fifteen miles of tube conductors were required for the

district, besides the boxes to connect the network at

the street intersections, and the hundreds of junction

boxes for taking the service conductors into each of

the hundreds of buildings. In addition to the

immense amount of money involved, this specialized

industry required an enormous amount of experiment,

as it called for the development of an entirely

new art. But with Edison's inventive fertility--if

ever there was a cross-fertilizer of mechanical ideas

it is he--and with Mr. Kruesi's never-failing patience

and perseverance applied to experiment and evolution,

rapid progress was made. A franchise having

been obtained from the city, the work of laying the

underground conductors began in the late fall of

1881, and was pushed with almost frantic energy. It

is not to be supposed, however, that the Edison tube

system had then reached a finality of perfection in

the eyes of its inventor. In his correspondence with

Kruesi, as late as 1887, we find Edison bewailing the

inadequacy of the insulation of the conductors under

twelve hundred volts pressure, as for example:

"Dear Kruesi,--There is nothing wrong with your

present compound. It is splendid. The whole

trouble is air-bubbles. The hotter it is poured the

greater the amount of air-bubbles. At 212 it can

be put on rods and there is no bubble. I have a man

experimenting and testing all the time. Until I get

at the proper method of pouring and getting rid of

the air-bubbles, it will be waste of time to experiment

with other asphalts. Resin oil distils off easily. It

may answer, but paraffine or other similar substances

must be put in to prevent brittleness, One thing is

certain, and that is, everything must be poured in

layers, not only the boxes, but the tubes. The tube

itself should have a thin coating. The rope should

also have a coating. The rods also. The whole lot,

rods and rope, when ready for tube, should have

another coat, and then be placed in tube and filled.

This will do the business." Broad and large as a

continent in his ideas, if ever there was a man of

finical fussiness in attention to detail, it is Edison.

A letter of seven pages of about the same date in

1887 expatiates on the vicious troubles caused by the

air-bubble, and remarks with fine insight into the

problems of insulation and the idea of layers of it:

"Thus you have three separate coatings, and it is

impossible an air-hole in one should match the

other."



To a man less thorough and empirical in method

than Edison, it would have been sufficient to have

made his plans clear to associates or subordinates

and hold them responsible for accurate results. No

such vicarious treatment would suit him, ready as he

has always been to share the work where he could

give his trust. In fact he realized, as no one else

did at this stage, the tremendous import of this

novel and comprehensive scheme for giving the world

light; and he would not let go, even if busy to the

breaking-point. Though plunged in a veritable maelstrom

of new and important business interests, and

though applying for no fewer than eighty-nine patents

in 1881, all of which were granted, he superintended

on the spot all this laying of underground conductors

for the first district. Nor did he merely stand around

and give orders. Day and night he actually worked

in the trenches with the laborers, amid the dirt and

paving-stones and hurry-burly of traffic, helping to

lay the tubes, filling up junction-boxes, and taking

part in all the infinite detail. He wanted to know

for himself how things went, why for some occult

reason a little change was necessary, what improvement

could be made in the material. His hours of

work were not regulated by the clock, but lasted until

he felt the need of a little rest. Then he would go

off to the station building in Pearl Street, throw an

overcoat on a pile of tubes, lie down and sleep for a

few hours, rising to resume work with the first gang.

There was a small bedroom on the third floor of the

station available for him, but going to bed meant

delay and consumed time. It is no wonder that

such impatience, such an enthusiasm, drove the work

forward at a headlong pace.



Edison says of this period: "When we put down

the tubes in the lower part of New York, in the

streets, we kept a big stock of them in the cellar of

the station at Pearl Street. As I was on all the time,

I would take a nap of an hour or so in the daytime--

any time--and I used to sleep on those tubes in the

cellar. I had two Germans who were testing there,

and both of them died of diphtheria, caught in the

cellar, which was cold and damp. It never affected

me."



It is worth pausing just a moment to glance at this

man taking a fitful rest on a pile of iron pipe in a

dingy building. His name is on the tip of the world's

tongue. Distinguished scientists from every part of

Europe seek him eagerly. He has just been decorated

and awarded high honors by the French Government.

He is the inventor of wonderful new apparatus, and

the exploiter of novel and successful arts. The magic

of his achievements and the rumors of what is being

done have caused a wild drop in gas securities, and a

sensational rise in his own electric-light stock from

$100 to $3500 a share. Yet these things do not at

all affect his slumber or his democratic simplicity,

for in that, as in everything else, he is attending

strictly to business, "doing the thing that is next

to him."



Part of the rush and feverish haste was due to the

approach of frost, which, as usual in New York, suspended

operations in the earth; but the laying of

the conductors was resumed promptly in the spring

of 1882; and meantime other work had been advanced.

During the fall and winter months two

more "Jumbo" dynamos were built and sent to

London, after which the construction of six for New

York was swiftly taken in hand. In the month of

May three of these machines, each with a capacity of

twelve hundred incandescent lamps, were delivered

at Pearl Street and assembled on the second floor.

On July 5th--owing to the better opportunity for

ceaseless toil given by a public holiday--the construction

of the operative part of the station was so

far completed that the first of the dynamos was

operated under steam; so that three days later the

satisfactory experiment was made of throwing its

flood of electrical energy into a bank of one thousand

lamps on an upper floor. Other tests followed in due

course. All was excitement. The field-regulating

apparatus and the electrical-pressure indicator--first

of its kind--were also tested, and in turn found

satisfactory. Another vital test was made at this time--

namely, of the strength of the iron structure itself

on which the plant was erected. This was done by

two structural experts; and not till he got their report

as to ample factors of safety was Edison reassured

as to this detail.



A remark of Edison, familiar to all who have

worked with him, when it is reported to him that

something new goes all right and is satisfactory from

all points of view, is: "Well, boys, now let's find the

bugs," and the hunt for the phylloxera begins with

fiendish, remorseless zest. Before starting the plant

for regular commercial service, he began personally

a series of practical experiments and tests to ascertain

in advance what difficulties would actually

arise in practice, so that he could provide remedies

or preventives. He had several cots placed in the

adjoining building, and he and a few of his most

strenuous assistants worked day and night, leaving

the work only for hurried meals and a snatch of

sleep. These crucial tests, aiming virtually to break

the plant down if possible within predetermined

conditions, lasted several weeks, and while most valuable

in the information they afforded, did not hinder

anything, for meantime customers' premises throughout

the district were being wired and supplied with lamps

and meters.



On Monday, September 4, 1882, at 3 o'clock, P.M.,

Edison realized the consummation of his broad and

original scheme. The Pearl Street station was officially

started by admitting steam to the engine of one of

the "Jumbos," current was generated, turned into

the network of underground conductors, and was

transformed into light by the incandescent lamps that

had thus far been installed. This date and event

may properly be regarded as historical, for they mark

the practical beginning of a new art, which in the

intervening years has grown prodigiously, and is still

increasing by leaps and bounds.



Everything worked satisfactorily in the main.

There were a few mechanical and engineering annoyances

that might naturally be expected to arise in a

new and unprecedented enterprise; but nothing of

sufficient moment to interfere with the steady and

continuous supply of current to customers at all

hours of the day and night. Indeed, once started,

this station was operated uninterruptedly for eight

years with only insignificant stoppage.



It will have been noted by the reader that there

was nothing to indicate rashness in starting up the

station, as only one dynamo was put in operation.

Within a short time, however, it was deemed desirable

to supply the underground network with more current,

as many additional customers had been connected

and the demand for the new light was increasing

very rapidly. Although Edison had successfully

operated several dynamos in multiple arc two

years before--i.e., all feeding current together into

the same circuits--there was not, at this early period

of experience, any absolute certainty as to what

particular results might occur upon the throwing of

the current from two or more such massive dynamos

into a great distributing system. The sequel showed

the value of Edison's cautious method in starting the

station by operating only a single unit at first.



He decided that it would be wise to make the trial

operation of a second "Jumbo" on a Sunday, when

business houses were closed in the district, thus

obviating any danger of false impressions in the public

mind in the event of any extraordinary manifestations.

The circumstances attending the adding of

a second dynamo are thus humorously described by

Edison: "My heart was in my mouth at first, but

everything worked all right.... Then we started another

engine and threw them in parallel. Of all the

circuses since Adam was born, we had the worst

then! One engine would stop, and the other would

run up to about a thousand revolutions, and then

they would see-saw. The trouble was with the governors.

When the circus commenced, the gang that

was standing around ran out precipitately, and I

guess some of them kept running for a block or two.

I grabbed the throttle of one engine, and E. H. Johnson,

who was the only one present to keep his wits,

caught hold of the other, and we shut them off."

One of the "gang" that ran, but, in this case, only to

the end of the room, afterward said: "At the time it

was a terrifying experience, as I didn't know what

was going to happen. The engines and dynamos

made a horrible racket, from loud and deep groans

to a hideous shriek, and the place seemed to be filled

with sparks and flames of all colors. It was as if the

gates of the infernal regions had been suddenly

opened."



This trouble was at once attacked by Edison in his

characteristic and strenuous way. The above experiment

took place between three and four o'clock on

a Sunday afternoon, and within a few hours he had

gathered his superintendent and men of the machine-

works and had them at work on a shafting device

that he thought would remedy the trouble. He says:

"Of course, I discovered that what had happened

was that one set was running the other as a motor.

I then put up a long shaft, connecting all the governors

together, and thought this would certainly

cure the trouble; but it didn't. The torsion of the

shaft was so great that one governor still managed

to get ahead of the others. Well, it was a serious

state of things, and I worried over it a lot. Finally

I went down to Goerck Street and got a piece of

shafting and a tube in which it fitted. I twisted the

shafting one way and the tube the other as far as I

could, and pinned them together. In this way, by

straining the whole outfit up to its elastic limit in

opposite directions, the torsion was practically

eliminated, and after that the governors ran together

all right."



Edison realized, however, that in commercial practice

this was only a temporary expedient, and that a

satisfactory permanence of results could only be

attained with more perfect engines that could be

depended upon for close and simple regulation. The

engines that were made part of the first three "Jum-

bos" placed in the station were the very best that

could be obtained at the time, and even then had

been specially designed and built for the purpose.

Once more quoting Edison on this subject: "About

that time" (when he was trying to run several dynamos

in parallel in the Pearl Street station) "I got

hold of Gardiner C. Sims, and he undertook to build

an engine to run at three hundred and fifty revolutions

and give one hundred and seventy-five horse-power.

He went back to Providence and set to work, and

brought the engine back with him to the shop. It

worked only a few minutes when it busted. That

man sat around that shop and slept in it for three

weeks, until he got his engine right and made it work

the way he wanted it to. When he reached this

period I gave orders for the engine-works to run night

and day until we got enough engines, and when all

was ready we started the engines. Then everything

worked all right.... One of these engines that Sims

built ran twenty-four hours a day, three hundred and

sixty-five days in the year, for over a year before it

stopped."[12]





[12] We quote the following interesting notes of Mr. Charles L.

Clarke on the question of see-sawing, or "hunting," as it was

afterward termed:





"In the Holborn Viaduct station the difficulty of `hunting'

was not experienced. At the time the `Jumbos' were first operated

in multiple arc, April 8, 1882, one machine was driven by

a Porter-Allen engine, and the other by an Armington & Sims engine,

and both machines were on a solid foundation. At the station

at Milan, Italy, the first `Jumbos' operated in multiple arc were

driven by Porter-Allen engines, and dash-pots were applied to the

governors. These machines were also upon a solid foundation,

and no trouble was experienced.



"At the Pearl Street station, however, the machines were sup-

ported upon long iron floor-beams, and at the high speed of 350

revolutions per minute, considerable vertical vibration was given

to the engines. And the writer is inclined to the opinion that

this vibration, acting in the same direction as the action of gravitation,

which was one of the two controlling forces in the operation

of the Porter-Allen governor, was the primary cause of the

`hunting.' In the Armington & Sims engine the controlling

forces in the operation of the governor were the centrifugal force

of revolving weights, and the opposing force of compressed springs,

and neither the action of gravitation nor the vertical vibrations

of the engine could have any sensible effect upon the governor,"









The Pearl Street station, as this first large plant

was called, made rapid and continuous growth in its

output of electric current. It started, as we have

said, on September 4, 1882, supplying about four

hundred lights to a comparatively small number of

customers. Among those first supplied was the banking

firm of Drexel, Morgan & Company, corner of

Broad and Wall streets, at the outermost limits of the

system. Before the end of December of the same year

the light had so grown in favor that it was being

supplied to over two hundred and forty customers

whose buildings were wired for over five thousand

lamps. By this time three more "Jumbos" had been

added to the plant. The output from this time forward

increased steadily up to the spring of 1884, when the

demands of the station necessitated the installation of

two additional "Jumbos" in the adjoining building,

which, with the venous improvements that had been

made in the mean time, gave the station a capacity of

over eleven thousand lamps actually in service at

any one time.



During the first three months of operating the Pearl

Street station light was supplied to customers with-

out charge. Edison had perfect confidence in his

meters, and also in the ultimate judgment of the public

as to the superiority of the incandescent electric

light as against other illuminants. He realized, however,

that in the beginning of the operation of an entirely

novel plant there was ample opportunity for

unexpected contingencies, although the greatest care

had been exercised to make everything as perfect as

possible. Mechanical defects or other unforeseen

troubles in any part of the plant or underground

system might arise and cause temporary stoppages of

operation, thus giving grounds for uncertainty which

would create a feeling of public distrust in the permanence

of the supply of light.



As to the kind of mishap that was wont to occur,

Edison tells the following story: "One afternoon,

after our Pearl Street station started, a policeman

rushed in and told us to send an electrician at once

up to the corner of Ann and Nassau streets--some

trouble. Another man and I went up. We found

an immense crowd of men and boys there and in the

adjoining streets--a perfect jam. There was a leak

in one of our junction-boxes, and on account of the

cellars extending under the street, the top soil had

become insulated. Hence, by means of this leak

powerful currents were passing through this thin

layer of moist earth. When a horse went to pass

over it he would get a very severe shock. When I

arrived I saw coming along the street a ragman with

a dilapidated old horse, and one of the boys told him

to go over on the other side of the road--which was

the place where the current leaked. When the rag-

man heard this he took that side at once. The moment

the horse struck the electrified soil he stood

straight up in the air, and then reared again; and the

crowd yelled, the policeman yelled; and the horse

started to run away. This continued until the crowd

got so serious that the policeman had to clear it out;

and we were notified to cut the current off. We got

a gang of men, cut the current off for several junction-

boxes, and fixed the leak. One man who had seen it

came to me next day and wanted me to put in apparatus

for him at a place where they sold horses. He said

he could make a fortune with it, because he could get old

nags in there and make them act like thoroughbreds."



So well had the work been planned and executed,

however, that nothing happened to hinder the continuous

working of the station and the supply of light

to customers. Hence it was decided in December,

1882, to begin charging a price for the service, and,

accordingly, Edison electrolytic meters were installed

on the premises of each customer then connected.

The first bill for lighting, based upon the

reading of one of these meters, amounted to $50.40,

and was collected on January 18, 1883, from the Ansonia

Brass and Copper Company, 17 and 19 Cliff

Street. Generally speaking, customers found that

their bills compared fairly with gas bills for

corresponding months where the same amount of light was

used, and they paid promptly and cheerfully, with

emphatic encomiums of the new light. During November,

1883, a little over one year after the station

was started, bills for lighting amounting to over $9000

were collected.



An interesting story of meter experience in the first

few months of operation of the Pearl Street station

is told by one of the "boys" who was then in position

to know the facts; "Mr. J. P. Morgan, whose firm was

one of the first customers, expressed to Mr. Edison

some doubt as to the accuracy of the meter. The

latter, firmly convinced of its correctness, suggested

a strict test by having some cards printed and hung

on each fixture at Mr. Morgan's place. On these

cards was to be noted the number of lamps in the

fixture, and the time they were turned on and off

each day for a month. At the end of that time the

lamp-hours were to be added together by one of the

clerks and figured on a basis of a definite amount per

lamp-hour, and compared with the bill that would be

rendered by the station for the corresponding period.

The results of the first month's test showed an apparent

overcharge by the Edison company. Mr. Morgan

was exultant, while Mr. Edison was still confident

and suggested a continuation of the test.

Another month's trial showed somewhat similar results.

Mr. Edison was a little disturbed, but insisted

that there was a mistake somewhere. He went down

to Drexel, Morgan & Company's office to investigate,

and, after looking around, asked when the office was

cleaned out. He was told it was done at night by

the janitor, who was sent for, and upon being interrogated

as to what light he used, said that he turned

on a central fixture containing about ten lights. It

came out that he had made no record of the time these

lights were in use. He was told to do so in future,

and another month's test was made. On comparison

with the company's bill, rendered on the meter-reading,

the meter came within a few cents of the amount

computed from the card records, and Mr. Morgan was

completely satisfied of the accuracy of the meter."



It is a strange but not extraordinary commentary

on the perversity of human nature and the lack of

correct observation, to note that even after the Pearl

Street station had been in actual operation twenty-

four hours a day for nearly three months, there

should still remain an attitude of "can't be done."

That such a scepticism still obtained is evidenced by

the public prints of the period. Edison's electric-

light system and his broad claims were freely discussed

and animadverted upon at the very time he

was demonstrating their successful application. To

show some of the feeling at the time, we reproduce

the following letter, which appeared November 29,

1882:



"To the Editor of the Sun:



"SIR,--In reading the discussions relative to the Pearl

Street station of the Edison light, I have noted that

while it is claimed that there is scarcely any loss from

leakage of current, nothing is said about the loss due to

the resistance of the long circuits. I am informed that

this is the secret of the failure to produce with the power

in position a sufficient amount of current to run all the

lamps that have been put up, and that while six, and

even seven, lights to the horse-power may be produced

from an isolated plant, the resistance of the long underground

wires reduces this result in the above case to less

than three lights to the horse-power, thus making the

cost of production greatly in excess of gas. Can the

Edison company explain this?

                                       "INVESTIGATOR."



This was one of the many anonymous letters that

had been written to the newspapers on the subject,

and the following reply by the Edison company was

printed December 3, 1882:





"To the Editor of the Sun:



"SIR,--`Investigator' in Wednesday's Sun, says that

the Edison company is troubled at its Pearl Street station

with a `loss of current, due to the resistance of the long

circuits'; also that, whereas Edison gets `six or even

seven lights to the horse-power in isolated plants, the

resistance of the long underground wires reduces that

result in the Pearl Street station to less than three lights

to the horse-power.' Both of these statements are false.

As regards loss due to resistance, there is a well-known

law for determining it, based on Ohm's law. By use of

that law we knew in advance, that is to say, when the

original plans for the station were drawn, just what this

loss would be, precisely the same as a mechanical engineer

when constructing a mill with long lines of shafting

can forecast the loss of power due to friction. The

practical result in the Pearl Street station has fully

demonstrated the correctness of our estimate thus made

in advance. As regards our getting only three lights

per horse-power, our station has now been running three

months, without stopping a moment, day or night, and

we invariably get over six lamps per horse-power, or

substantially the same as we do in our isolated plants.

We are now lighting one hundred and ninety-three buildings,

wired for forty-four hundred lamps, of which about

two-thirds are in constant use, and we are adding

additional houses and lamps daily. These figures can be

verified at the office of the Board of Underwriters, where

certificates with full details permitting the use of our

light are filed by their own inspector. To light these

lamps we run from one to three dynamos, according to

the lamps in use at any given time, and we shall start

additional dynamos as fast as we can connect more buildings.

Neither as regards the loss due to resistance, nor

as regards the number of lamps per horse-power, is there

the slightest trouble or disappointment on the part of

our company, and your correspondent is entirely in error

is assuming that there is. Let me suggest that if `Investigator'

really wishes to investigate, and is competent

and willing to learn the exact facts, he can do

so at this office, where there is no mystery of concealment,

but, on the contrary, a strong desire to communicate

facts to intelligent inquirers. Such a method of

investigating must certainly be more satisfactory to one

honestly seeking knowledge than that of first assuming

an error as the basis of a question, and then demanding

an explanation.

                             "Yours very truly,

                                       "S. B. EATON, President."





Viewed from the standpoint of over twenty-seven

years later, the wisdom and necessity of answering

anonymous newspaper letters of this kind might be

deemed questionable, but it must be remembered that,

although the Pearl Street station was working

successfully, and Edison's comprehensive plans were

abundantly vindicated, the enterprise was absolutely

new and only just stepping on the very threshold of

commercial exploitation. To enter in and possess

the land required the confidence of capital and the

general public. Hence it was necessary to maintain

a constant vigilance to defeat the insidious attacks of

carping critics and others who would attempt to

injure the Edison system by misleading statements.



It will be interesting to the modern electrician to

note that when this pioneer station was started, and

in fact for some little time afterward, there was not

a single electrical instrument in the whole station--

not a voltmeter or an ammeter! Nor was there a

central switchboard! Each dynamo had its own individual

control switch. The feeder connections were

all at the front of the building, and the general voltage

control apparatus was on the floor above. An

automatic pressure indicator had been devised and

put in connection with the main circuits. It consisted,

generally speaking, of an electromagnet with

relays connecting with a red and a blue lamp. When

the electrical pressure was normal, neither lamp was

lighted; but if the electromotive force rose above a

predetermined amount by one or two volts, the red

lamp lighted up, and the attendant at the hand-wheel

of the field regulator inserted resistance in the field

circuit, whereas, if the blue lamp lighted, resistance

was cut out until the pressure was raised to normal.

Later on this primitive indicator was supplanted by

the "Bradley Bridge," a crude form of the "Howell"

pressure indicators, which were subsequently used

for many years in the Edison stations.



Much could be added to make a complete pictorial

description of the historic Pearl Street station, but

it is not within the scope of this narrative to enter

into diffuse technical details, interesting as they may

be to many persons. We cannot close this chapter,

however, without mention of the fate of the Pearl

Street station, which continued in successful commercial

operation until January 2, 1890, when it was

partially destroyed by fire. All the "Jumbos" were

ruined, excepting No. 9, which is still a venerated

relic in the possession of the New York Edison Company.

Luckily, the boilers were unharmed. Belt-

driven generators and engines were speedily installed,

and the station was again in operation in a few days.

The uninjured "Jumbo," No. 9, again continued to

perform its duty. But in the words of Mr. Charles L.

Clarke, "the glory of the old Pearl Street station,

unique in bearing the impress of Mr. Edison's personality,

and, as it were, constructed with his own

hands, disappeared in the flame and smoke of that

Thursday morning fire."



The few days' interruption of the service was the

only serious one that has taken place in the history

of the New York Edison Company from September 4,

1882, to the present date. The Pearl Street station

was operated for some time subsequent to the fire,

but increasing demands in the mean time having led

to the construction of other stations, the mains of

the First District were soon afterward connected to

another plant, the Pearl Street station was dismantled,

and the building was sold in 1895.



The prophetic insight into the magnitude of central-

station lighting that Edison had when he was still

experimenting on the incandescent lamp over thirty

years ago is a little less than astounding, when it is

so amply verified in the operations of the New York

Edison Company (the successor of the Edison Electric

Illuminating Company of New York) and many others.

At the end of 1909 the New York Edison Company

alone was operating twenty-eight stations and substations,

having a total capacity of 159,500 kilowatts.

Connected with its lines were approximately 85,000

customers wired for 3,813,899 incandescent lamps and

nearly 225,000 horse-power through industrial electric

motors connected with the underground service.

A large quantity of electrical energy is also supplied

for heating and cooking, charging automobiles, chemical

and plating work, and various other uses.


