




CHAPTER XXVIII



THE BLACK FLAG



THROUGHOUT the forty-odd years of his creative

life, Edison has realized by costly experience

the truth of the cynical proverb that "A patent

is merely a title to a lawsuit." It is not intended,

however, by this statement to lead to any inference

on the part of the reader that HE stands peculiarly

alone in any such experience, for it has been and

still is the common lot of every successful inventor,

sooner or later.



To attribute dishonesty or cupidity as the root of

the defence in all patent litigation would be aiming

very wide of the mark, for in no class of suits that

come before the courts are there any that present a

greater variety of complex, finely shaded questions,

or that require more delicacy of interpretation, than

those that involve the construction of patents, particularly

those relating to electrical devices. Indeed,

a careful study of legal procedure of this character

could not be carried far without discovery of the fact

that in numerous instances the differences of opinion

between litigants were marked by the utmost bona

fides.



On the other hand, such study would reveal many

cases of undoubted fraudulent intent, as well as many

bold attempts to deprive the inventor of the fruits

of his endeavors by those who have sought to evade,

through subtle technicalities of the law, the penalty

justly due them for trickery, evasion, or open contempt

of the rights of others.



In the history of science and of the arts to which

the world has owed its continued progress from year

to year there is disclosed one remarkable fact, and that

is, that whenever any important discovery or invention

has been made and announced by one man, it has

almost always been disclosed later that other men

--possibly widely separated and knowing nothing of

the other's work--have been following up the same

general lines of investigation, independently, with the

same object in mind. Their respective methods might

be dissimilar while tending to the same end, but it

does not necessarily follow that any one of these

other experimenters might ever have achieved the result

aimed at, although, after the proclamation of

success by one, it is easy to believe that each of the

other independent investigators might readily persuade

himself that he would ultimately have reached

the goal in just that same way.



This peculiar coincidence of simultaneous but

separate work not only comes to light on the bringing

out of great and important discoveries or inventions,

but becomes more apparent if a new art is disclosed,

for then the imagination of previous experimenters

is stimulated through wide dissemination of the tidings,

sometimes resulting in more or less effort to

enter the newly opened field with devices or methods

that resemble closely the original and fundamental

ones in principle and application. In this and other

ways there arises constantly in the United States

Patent Office a large number of contested cases,

called "Interferences," where applications for patents

covering the invention of a similar device have been

independently filed by two or even more persons.

In such cases only one patent can be issued, and that

to the inventor who on the taking of testimony shows

priority in date of invention.[20]





[20] A most remarkable instance of contemporaneous invention

and without a parallel in the annals of the United States Patent

Office, occurred when, on the same day, February 15, 1876, two

separate descriptions were filed in that office, one a complete

application and the other a caveat, but each covering an invention

for "transmitting vocal sounds telegraphically." The application

was made by Alexander Graham Bell, of Salem, Massachusetts,

and the caveat by Elisha Gray, of Chicago, Illinois. On

examination of the two papers it was found that both of them

covered practically the same ground, hence, as only one patent

could be granted, it became necessary to ascertain the precise

hour at which the documents were respectively filed, and put the

parties in interference. This was done, with the result that the

patent was ultimately awarded to Bell.







In the opening up and development of any new art

based upon a fundamental discovery or invention,

there ensues naturally an era of supplemental or

collateral inventive activity--the legitimate outcome

of the basic original ideas. Part of this development

may be due to the inventive skill and knowledge of

the original inventor and his associates, who, by reason

of prior investigation, would be in better position

to follow up the art in its earliest details than others,

who might be regarded as mere outsiders. Thus a

new enterprise may be presented before the world

by its promoters in the belief that they are strongly

fortified by patent rights which will protect them in

a degree commensurate with the risks they have

assumed.



Supplemental inventions, however, in any art, new

or old, are not limited to those which emanate from

the original workers, for the ingenuity of man, influenced

by the spirit of the times, seizes upon any

novel line of action and seeks to improve or enlarge

upon it, or, at any rate, to produce more or less variation

of its phases. Consequently, there is a constant

endeavor on the part of a countless host of men possessing

some degree of technical skill and inventive

ability, to win fame and money by entering into

the already opened fields of endeavor with devices

and methods of their own, for which subsidiary

patents may be obtainable. Some of such patents

may prove to be valuable, while it is quite certain

that in the natural order of things others will be

commercially worthless, but none may be entirely

disregarded in the history and development of the

art.



It will be quite obvious, therefore, that the advent

of any useful invention or discovery, great or small,

is followed by a clashing of many interests which become

complex in their interpretation by reason of

the many conflicting claims that cluster around the

main principle. Nor is the confusion less confounded

through efforts made on the part of dishonest persons,

who, like vultures, follow closely on the trail

of successful inventors and (sometimes through

information derived by underhand methods) obtain

patents on alleged inventions, closely approximating

the real ones, solely for the purpose of harassing the

original patentee until they are bought up, or else,

with the intent of competing boldly in the new business,

trust in the delays of legal proceedings to obtain

a sure foothold in their questionable enterprise.



Then again there are still others who, having no

patent rights, but waving aside all compunction and

in downright fraud, simply enter the commercial field

against the whole world, using ruthlessly whatever

inventive skill and knowledge the original patentee

may have disclosed, and trusting to the power of

money, rapid movement, and mendacious advertising

to build up a business which shall presently assume

such formidable proportions as to force a compromise,

or stave off an injunction until the patent

has expired. In nine cases out of ten such a course

can be followed with relative impunity; and guided

by skilful experts who may suggest really trivial

changes here and there over the patented structure,

and with the aid of keen and able counsel, hardly a

patent exists that could not be invaded by such infringers.

Such is the condition of our laws and practice

that the patentee in seeking to enforce his rights

labors under a terrible handicap.



And, finally, in this recital of perplexing conditions

confronting the inventor, there must not be forgotten

the commercial "shark," whose predatory instincts

are ever keenly alert for tender victims. In the wake

of every newly developed art of world-wide importance

there is sure to follow a number of unscrupulous

adventurers, who hasten to take advantage of general

public ignorance of the true inwardness of affairs.

Basing their operations on this lack of knowledge,

and upon the tendency of human nature to give

credence to widely advertised and high-sounding descriptions

and specious promises of vast profits, these

men find little difficulty in conjuring money out of

the pockets of the unsophisticated and gullible, who

rush to become stockholders in concerns that have

"airy nothings" for a foundation, and that collapse

quickly when the bubble is pricked.[21]





[21] A notable instance of the fleecing of unsuspecting and credulous

persons occurred in the early eighties, during the furor

occasioned by the introduction of Mr. Edison's electric-light system.

A corporation claiming to have a self-generating dynamo

(practically perpetual motion) advertised its preposterous claims

extensively, and actually succeeded in selling a large amount of

stock, which, of course, proved to be absolutely worthless.







To one who is unacquainted with the trying circumstances

attending the introduction and marketing of

patented devices, it might seem unnecessary that an

inventor and his business associates should be obliged

to take into account the unlawful or ostensible competition

of pirates or schemers, who, in the absence

of legal decision, may run a free course for a long

time. Nevertheless, as public patronage is the element

vitally requisite for commercial success, and as

the public is not usually in full possession of all the

facts and therefore cannot discriminate between the

genuine and the false, the legitimate inventor must

avail himself of every possible means of proclaiming

and asserting his rights if he desires to derive any

benefit from the results of his skill and labor. Not

only must he be prepared to fight in the Patent

Office and pursue a regular course of patent litigation

against those who may honestly deem themselves to

be protected by other inventions or patents of similar

character, and also proceed against more palpable

infringers who are openly, defiantly, and illegitimately

engaged in competitive business operations,

but he must, as well, endeavor to protect himself

against the assaults of impudent fraud by educating

the public mind to a point of intelligent apprehension

of the true status of his invention and the conflicting

claims involved.



When the nature of a patent right is considered it

is difficult to see why this should be so. The inventor

creates a new thing--an invention of utility--and the

people, represented by the Federal Government, say

to him in effect: "Disclose your invention to us in a

patent so that we may know how to practice it, and

we will agree to give you a monopoly for seventeen

years, after which we shall be free to use it. If the

right thus granted is invaded, apply to a Federal

Court and the infringer will be enjoined and required

to settle in damages." Fair and false promise! Is

it generally realized that no matter how flagrant the

infringement nor how barefaced and impudent the

infringer, no Federal Court will grant an injunction

UNTIL THE PATENT SHALL HAVE BEEN FIRST LITIGATED TO FINAL

HEARING AND SUSTAINED? A procedure, it may be

stated, requiring years of time and thousands of

dollars, during which other infringers have generally

entered the field, and all have grown fat.



Thus Edison and his business associates have been

forced into a veritable maelstrom of litigation during

the major part of the last forty years, in the effort

to procure for themselves a small measure of protec-

tion for their interests under the numerous inventions

of note that he has made at various times in that

period. The earlier years of his inventive activity,

while productive of many important contributions

to electrical industries, such as stock tickers and

printers, duplex, quadruplex, and automatic telegraphs,

were not marked by the turmoil of interminable

legal conflicts that arose after the beginning of

the telephone and electric-light epochs. In fact, his

inventions; up to and including his telephone

improvements (which entered into already existing arts),

had been mostly purchased by the Western Union

and other companies, and while there was more or

less contesting of his claims (especially in respect of

the telephone), the extent of such litigation was not

so conspicuously great as that which centred

subsequently around his patents covering incandescent

electric lighting and power systems.



Through these inventions there came into being

an entirely new art, complete in its practicability

evolved by Edison after protracted experiments founded

upon most patient, thorough, and original methods

of investigation extending over several years. Long

before attaining the goal, he had realized with

characteristic insight the underlying principles of the

great and comprehensive problem he had started out to

solve, and plodded steadily along the path that he had

marked out, ignoring the almost universal scientific

disbelief in his ultimate success. "Dreamer," "fool,"

"boaster" were among the appellations bestowed

upon him by unbelieving critics. Ridicule was heaped

upon him in the public prints, and mathematics were

called into service by learned men to settle the point

forever that he was attempting the utterly impossible.



But, presto! no sooner had he accomplished the

task and shown concrete results to the world than

he found himself in the anomalous position of being

at once surrounded by the conditions which inevitably

confront every inventor. The path through the

trackless forest had been blazed, and now every one

could find the way. At the end of the road was a

rich prize belonging rightfully to the man who had

opened a way to it, but the struggles of others to

reach it by more or less honest methods now began

and continued for many years. If, as a former

commissioner once said, "Edison was the man who kept

the path to the Patent Office hot with his footsteps,"

there were other great inventors abreast or immediately

on his heels, some, to be sure, with legitimate,

original methods and vital improvements representing

independent work; while there were also those

who did not trouble to invent, but simply helped

themselves to whatever ideas were available, and

coming from any source.



Possibly events might have happened differently

had Edison been able to prevent the announcement

of his electric-light inventions until he was entirely

prepared to bring out the system as a whole, ready

for commercial exploitation, but the news of his

production of a practical and successful incandescent

lamp became known and spread like wild-fire to all

corners of the globe. It took more than a year after

the evolution of the lamp for Edison to get into position

to do actual business, and during that time his

laboratory was the natural Mecca of every inquiring

person. Small wonder, then, that when he was prepared

to market his invention he should find others

entering that market, at home and abroad, at the

same time, and with substantially similar merchandise.



Edison narrates two incidents that may be taken

as characteristic of a good deal that had to be contended

with, coming in the shape of nefarious attack.

"In the early days of my electric light," he says,

"curiosity and interest brought a great many people

to Menlo Park to see it. Some of them did not come

with the best of intentions. I remember the visit of

one expert, a well-known electrician, a graduate of

Johns Hopkins University, and who then represented

a Baltimore gas company. We had the lamps exhibited

in a large room, and so arranged on a table

as to illustrate the regular layout of circuits for

houses and streets. Sixty of the men employed at

the laboratory were used as watchers, each to keep

an eye on a certain section of the exhibit, and see

there was no monkeying with it. This man had a

length of insulated No. 10 wire passing through his

sleeves and around his back, so that his hands would

conceal the ends and no one would know he had it.

His idea, of course, was to put this wire across the

ends of the supplying circuits, and short-circuit the

whole thing--put it all out of business without being

detected. Then he could report how easily the electric

light went out, and a false impression would be conveyed

to the public. He did not know that we had

already worked out the safety-fuse, and that every

group of lights was thus protected independently.

He put this jumper slyly in contact with the wires--

and just four lamps went out on the section he tampered

with. The watchers saw him do it, however,

and got hold of him and just led him out of the place

with language that made the recording angels jump

for their typewriters."



The other incident is as follows: "Soon after I had

got out the incandescent light I had an interference

in the Patent Office with a man from Wisconsin. He

filed an application for a patent and entered into a

conspiracy to `swear back' of the date of my invention,

so as to deprive me of it. Detectives were put

on the case, and we found he was a `faker,' and we

took means to break the thing up. Eugene Lewis, of

Eaton & Lewis, had this in hand for me. Several years

later this same man attempted to defraud a leading

firm of manufacturing chemists in New York, and was

sent to State prison. A short time after that a syndicate

took up a man named Goebel and tried to do

the same thing, but again our detective-work was

too much for them. This was along the same line as

the attempt of Drawbaugh to deprive Bell of his

telephone. Whenever an invention of large prospective

value comes out, these cases always occur.

The lamp patent was sustained in the New York

Federal Court. I thought that was final and would

end the matter, but another Federal judge out in

St. Louis did not sustain it. The result is I have

never enjoyed any benefits from my lamp patents,

although I fought for many years." The Goebel

case will be referred to later in this chapter.



The original owner of the patents and inventions

covering his electric-lighting system, the Edison

Electric Light Company (in which Edison was largely

interested as a stockholder), thus found at the outset

that its commercial position was imperilled by the

activity of competitors who had sprung up like

mushrooms. It became necessary to take proper

preliminary legal steps to protect the interests which

had been acquired at the cost of so much money and

such incessant toil and experiment. During the first

few years in which the business of the introduction

of the light was carried on with such strenuous and

concentrated effort, the attention of Edison and his

original associates was constantly focused upon the

commercial exploitation and the further development

of the system at home and abroad. The difficult

and perplexing situation at that time is thus

described by Major S. B. Eaton:



"The reason for the delay in beginning and pushing

suits for infringements of the lamp patent has

never been generally understood. In my official position

as president of the Edison Electric Light Company

I became the target, along with Mr. Edison, for

censure from the stockholders and others on account

of this delay, and I well remember how deep the feeling

was. In view of the facts that a final injunction

on the lamp patent was not obtained until the life

of the patent was near its end, and, next, that no

damages in money were ever paid by the guilty infringers,

it has been generally believed that Mr. Edison

sacrificed the interest of his stockholders selfishly

when he delayed the prosecution of patent suits and

gave all his time and energies to manufacturing.

This belief was the stronger because the manufacturing

enterprises belonged personally to Mr. Edison

and not to his company. But the facts render it

easy to dispel this false belief. The Edison inventions

were not only a lamp; they comprised also an entire

system of central stations. Such a thing was new to

the world, and the apparatus, as well as the manufacture

thereof, was equally new. Boilers, engines,

dynamos, motors, distribution mains, meters, house-

wiring, safety-devices, lamps, and lamp-fixtures--all

were vital parts of the whole system. Most of them

were utterly novel and unknown to the arts, and all

of them required quick, and, I may say, revolutionary

thought and invention. The firm of Babcock & Wilcox

gave aid on the boilers, Armington & Sims undertook

the engines, but everything else was abnormal.

No factories in the land would take up the manufacture.

I remember, for instance, our interviews

with Messrs. Mitchell, Vance & Co., the leading

manufacturers of house gas-lighting fixtures, such as

brackets and chandeliers. They had no faith in electric

lighting, and rejected all our overtures to induce

them to take up the new business of making electric-

light fixtures. As regards other parts of the Edison

system, notably the Edison dynamo, no such machines

had ever existed; there was no factory in the

world equipped to make them, and, most discouraging

of all, the very scientific principles of their

construction were still vague and experimental.



"What was to be done? Mr. Edison has never

been greater than when he met and solved this crisis.

`If there are no factories,' he said, `to make my

inventions, I will build the factories myself. Since

capital is timid, I will raise and supply it. The issue

is factories or death.' Mr. Edison invited the co-

operation of his leading stockholders. They lacked

confidence or did not care to increase their

investments. He was forced to go on alone. The chain

of Edison shops was then created. By far the most

perplexing of these new manufacturing problems was

the lamp. Not only was it a new industry, one without

shadow of prototype, but the mechanical devices

for making the lamps, and to some extent the very

machines to make those devices, were to be invented.

All of this was done by the courage, capital, and

invincible energy and genius of the great inventor.

But Mr. Edison could not create these great and

diverse industries and at the same time give requisite

attention to litigation. He could not start and develop

the new and hard business of electric lighting

and yet spare one hour to pursue infringers. One

thing or the other must wait. All agreed that it must

be the litigation. And right there a lasting blow was

given to the prestige of the Edison patents. The delay

was translated as meaning lack of confidence;

and the alert infringer grew strong in courage and

capital. Moreover, and what was the heaviest blow

of all, he had time, thus unmolested, to get a good

start.



"In looking back on those days and scrutinizing

them through the years, I am impressed by the greatness,

the solitary greatness I may say, of Mr. Edison.

We all felt then that we were of importance, and that

our contribution of effort and zeal were vital. I can

see now, however, that the best of us was nothing but

the fly on the wheel. Suppose anything had happened

to Edison? All would have been chaos and ruin..

To him, therefore, be the glory, if not the profit."



The foregoing remarks of Major Eaton show authoritatively

how the much-discussed delay in litigating

the Edison patents was so greatly misunderstood at

the time, and also how imperatively necessary it was

for Edison and his associates to devote their entire

time and energies to the commercial development of

the art. As the lighting business increased, however,

and a great number of additional men were

initiated into its mysteries, Edison and his experts

were able to spare some time to legal matters, and

an era of active patent litigation against infringers

was opened about the year 1885 by the Edison company,

and thereafter continued for many years.



While the history of this vast array of legal proceedings

possesses a fascinating interest for those involved,

as well as for professional men, legal and scientific,

it could not be expected that it would excite any

such feeling on the part of a casual reader. Hence,

it is not proposed to encumber this narrative with

any detailed record of the numerous suits that were

brought and conducted through their complicated

ramifications by eminent counsel. Suffice it to say

that within about sixteen years after the commencement

of active patent litigation, there had been spent

by the owners of the Edison lighting patents upward

of two million dollars in prosecuting more than two

hundred lawsuits brought against persons who were

infringing many of the patents of Edison on the

incandescent electric lamp and component parts of his

system. Over fifty separate patents were involved

in these suits, including the basic one on the lamp

(ordinarily called the "Filament" patent), other detail

lamp patents, as well as those on sockets, switches,

dynamos, motors, and distributing systems.



The principal, or "test," suit on the "Filament"

patent was that brought against "The United States

Electric Lighting Company," which became a cause

celebre in the annals of American jurisprudence.

Edison's claims were strenuously and stubbornly contested

throughout a series of intense legal conflicts

that raged in the courts for a great many years. Both

sides of the controversy were represented by legal

talent of the highest order, under whose examination

and cross-examination volumes of testimony were

taken, until the printed record (including exhibits)

amounted to more than six thousand pages. Scientific

and technical literature and records in all parts of

the civilized world were subjected to the most minute

scrutiny of opposing experts in the endeavor to prove

Edison to be merely an adapter of methods and devices

already projected or suggested by others. The

world was ransacked for anything that might be

claimed as an anticipation of what he had done.

Every conceivable phase of ingenuity that could be

devised by technical experts was exercised in the

attempt to show that Edison had accomplished nothing

new. Everything that legal acumen could suggest--

every subtle technicality of the law--all the

complicated variations of phraseology that the novel

nomenclature of a young art would allow--all were

pressed into service and availed of by the contestors

of the Edison invention in their desperate effort to

defeat his claims. It was all in vain, however, for

the decision of the court was in favor of Edison, and

his lamp patent was sustained not only by the

tribunal of the first resort, but also by the Appellate

Court some time afterward.



The first trial was had before Judge Wallace in the

United States Circuit Court for the Southern District

of New York, and the appeal was heard by Judges

Lacombe and Shipman, of the United States Circuit

Court of Appeals. Before both tribunals the cause

had been fully represented by counsel chosen from

among the most eminent representatives of the bar

at that time, those representing the Edison interests

being the late Clarence A. Seward and Grosvenor P.

Lowrey, together with Sherburne Blake Eaton,

Albert H. Walker, and Richard N. Dyer. The presentation

of the case to the courts had in both instances

been marked by masterly and able arguments, elucidated

by experiments and demonstrations to educate

the judges on technical points. Some appreciation

of the magnitude of this case may be gained from the

fact that the argument on its first trial employed a

great many days, and the minutes covered hundreds

of pages of closely typewritten matter, while the

argument on appeal required eight days, and was set

forth in eight hundred and fifty pages of typewriting.

Eliminating all purely forensic eloquence and exparte

statements, the addresses of counsel in this celebrated

suit are worthy of deep study by an earnest

student, for, taken together, they comprise the most

concise, authentic, and complete history of the prior

state of the art and the development of the incandescent

lamp that had been made up to that time.[22]





[22] The argument on appeal was conducted with the dignity and

decorum that characterize such a proceeding in that court.

There is usually little that savors of humor in the ordinary conduct

of a case of this kind, but in the present instance a pertinent

story was related by Mr. Lowrey, and it is now reproduced. In

the course of his address to the court, Mr. Lowrey said:





"I have to mention the name of one expert whose testimony

will, I believe, be found as accurate, as sincere, as straightforward

as if it were the preaching of the gospel. I do it with great pleasure,

and I ask you to read the testimony of Charles L. Clarke

along with that of Thomas A. Edison. He had rather a hard row

to hoe. He is a young gentleman; he is a very well-instructed

man in his profession; he is not what I have called in the argument

below an expert in the art of testifying, like some of the

others, he has not yet become expert; what he may descend to

later cannot be known; he entered upon his first experience, I

think, with my brother Duncan, who is no trifler when he comes

to deal with these questions, and for several months Mr. Clarke

was pursued up and down, over a range of suggestions of what he

would have thought if he had thought something else had been

said at some time when something else was not said."



Mr. Duncan--"I got three pages a day out of him, too."



Mr. Lowrey--"Well, it was a good result. It always recalled

to me what I venture now, since my friend breaks in upon me in

this rude manner, to tell the court as well illustrative of what

happened there. It is the story of the pickerel and the roach.

My friend, Professor Von Reisenberg, of the University of Ghent,

pursued a series of investigations into the capacity of various

animals to receive ideas. Among the rest he put a pickerel into

a tank containing water, and separated across its middle by a

transparent glass plate, and on the other side he put a red roach.

Now your Honors both know how a pickerel loves a red roach,

and I have no doubt you will remember that he is a fish of a very

low forehead and an unlimited appetite. When this pickerel saw

the red roach through the glass, he made one of those awful dashes

which is usually the ruin of whatever stands in its-way; but he

didn't reach the red roach. He received an impression, doubtless.

It was not sufficient, however, to discourage him, and he

immediately tried again, and he continued to try for three-

quarters of an hour. At the end of three-quarters of an hour he

seemed a little shaken and discouraged, and stopped, and the

red roach was taken out for that day and the pickerel left. On

the succeeding day the red roach was restored, and the pickerel

had forgotten the impressions of the first day, and he repeated

this again. At the end of the second day the roach was taken

out. This was continued, not through so long a period as the

effort to take my friend Clarke and devour him, but for a period

of about three weeks. At the end of the three weeks, the time

during which the pickerel persisted each day had been shortened

and shortened, until it was at last discovered that he didn't try

at all. The plate glass was then removed, and the pickerel and

the red roach sailed around together in perfect peace ever afterward.

The pickerel doubtless attributed to the roach all this

shaking, the rebuff which he had received. And that is about

the condition in which my brother Duncan and my friend Clarke

were at the end of this examination."



Mr. Duncan--"I notice on the redirect that Mr. Clarke changed

his color."



Mr. Lowrey--"Well, perhaps he was a different kind of a

roach then; but you didn't succeed in taking him.



"I beg your Honors to read the testimony of Mr. Clarke in the

light of the anecdote of the pickerel and the roach."







Owing to long-protracted delays incident to the

taking of testimony and preparation for trial, the

argument before the United States Circuit Court of

Appeals was not had until the late spring of 1892,

and its decision in favor of the Edison Lamp patent

was filed on October 4, 1892, MORE THAN TWELVE YEARS

AFTER THE ISSUANCE OF THE PATENT ITSELF.



As the term of the patent had been limited under

the law, because certain foreign patents had been

issued to Edison before that in this country, there

was now but a short time left for enjoyment of

the exclusive rights contemplated by the statute and

granted to Edison and his assigns by the terms of

the patent itself. A vigorous and aggressive legal

campaign was therefore inaugurated by the Edison

Electric Light Company against the numerous infringing

companies and individuals that had sprung

up while the main suit was pending. Old suits were

revived and new ones instituted. Injunctions were

obtained against many old offenders, and it seemed

as though the Edison interests were about to come

into their own for the brief unexpired term of the

fundamental patent, when a new bombshell was

dropped into the Edison camp in the shape of an

alleged anticipation of the invention forty years

previously by one Henry Goebel. Thus, in 1893,

the litigation was reopened, and a protracted series

of stubbornly contested conflicts was fought in the

courts.



Goebel's claims were not unknown to the Edison

Company, for as far back as 1882 they had been

officially brought to its notice coupled with an offer

of sale for a few thousand dollars. A very brief

examination into their merits, however, sufficed to

demonstrate most emphatically that Goebel had never

made a practical incandescent lamp, nor had he ever

contributed a single idea or device bearing, remotely

or directly, on the development of the art. Edison

and his company, therefore, rejected the offer unconditionally

and declined to enter into any arrangements

whatever with Goebel. During the prosecution

of the suits in 1893 it transpired that the Goebel

claims had also been investigated by the counsel of

the defendant company in the principal litigation already

related, but although every conceivable defence

and anticipation had been dragged into the case

during the many years of its progress, the alleged

Goebel anticipation was not even touched upon therein.

From this fact it is quite apparent that they placed

no credence on its bona fides.



But desperate cases call for desperate remedies.

Some of the infringing lamp-manufacturing concerns,

which during the long litigation had grown strong

and lusty, and thus far had not been enjoined by the

court, now saw injunctions staring them in the face,

and in desperation set up the Goebel so-called

anticipation as a defence in the suits brought against

them.



This German watchmaker, Goebel, located in the

East Side of New York City, had undoubtedly been

interested, in a desultory kind of way, in simple

physical phenomena, and a few trifling experiments

made by him some forty or forty-five years previously

were magnified and distorted into brilliant and all-

comprehensive discoveries and inventions. Avalanches

of affidavits of himself, "his sisters and his

cousins and his aunts," practically all persons in

ordinary walks of life, and of old friends, contributed

a host of recollections that seemed little short of

miraculous in their detailed accounts of events of a

scientific nature that were said to have occurred so

many years before. According to affidavits of Goebel

himself and some of his family, nothing that would

anticipate Edison's claim had been omitted from his

work, for he (Goebel) claimed to have employed the

all-glass globe, into which were sealed platinum wires

carrying a tenuous carbon filament, from which the

occluded gases had been liberated during the process

of high exhaustion. He had even determined upon

bamboo as the best material for filaments. On the

face of it he was seemingly gifted with more than

human prescience, for in at least one of his exhibit

lamps, said to have been made twenty years previously,

he claimed to have employed processes which Edison

and his associates had only developed by several

years of experience in making thousands of lamps!



The Goebel story was told by the affidavits in an

ingenuous manner, with a wealth of simple homely

detail that carried on its face an appearance of truth

calculated to deceive the elect, had not the elect been

somewhat prepared by their investigation made some

eleven years before.



The story was met by the Edison interests with

counter-affidavits, showing its utter improbabilities

and absurdities from the standpoint of men of science

and others versed in the history and practice of the

art; also affidavits of other acquaintances and neighbors

of Goebel flatly denying the exhibitions he

claimed to have made. The issue thus being joined,

the legal battle raged over different sections of the

country. A number of contumeliously defiant infringers

in various cities based fond hopes of immunity

upon the success of this Goebel evidence, but

were defeated. The attitude of the courts is well

represented in the opinion of Judge Colt, rendered in

a motion for injunction against the Beacon Vacuum

Pump and Electrical Company. The defence alleged

the Goebel anticipation, in support of which it offered

in evidence four lamps, Nos. 1, 2, and 3 purporting

to have been made before 1854, and No. 4 before

1872. After a very full review of the facts in the

case, and a fair consideration of the defendants'

affidavits, Judge Colt in his opinion goes on to say:





"It is extremely improbable that Henry Goebel constructed

a practical incandescent lamp in 1854. This is

manifest from the history of the art for the past fifty

years, the electrical laws which since that time have been

discovered as applicable to the incandescent lamp, the

imperfect means which then existed for obtaining a

vacuum, the high degree of skill necessary in the construction

of all its parts, and the crude instruments with

which Goebel worked.



"Whether Goebel made the fiddle-bow lamps, 1, 2,

and 3, is not necessary to determine. The weight of

evidence on this motion is in the direction that he made

these lamp or lamps similar in general appearance, though

it is manifest that few, if any, of the many witnesses who

saw the Goebel lamp could form an accurate judgment of

the size of the filament or burner. But assuming they

were made, they do not anticipate the invention of Edison.

At most they were experimental toys used to advertise

his telescope, or to flash a light upon his clock,

or to attract customers to his shop. They were crudely

constructed, and their life was brief. They could not

be used for domestic purposes. They were in no proper

sense the practical commercial lamp of Edison. The

literature of the art is full of better lamps, all of which

are held not to anticipate the Edison patent.



"As for Lamp No. 4, I cannot but view it with

suspicion. It presents a new appearance. The reason

given for not introducing it before the hearing is

unsatisfactory. This lamp, to my mind, envelops with a cloud

of distrust the whole Goebel story. It is simply

impossible under the circumstances to believe that a lamp

so constructed could have been made by Goebel before

1872. Nothing in the evidence warrants such a sup-

position, and other things show it to be untrue. This

lamp has a carbon filament, platinum leading-in wires, a

good vacuum, and is well sealed and highly finished. It

is said that this lamp shows no traces of mercury in the

bulb because the mercury was distilled, but Goebel says

nothing about distilled mercury in his first affidavit, and

twice he speaks of the particles of mercury clinging to

the inside of the chamber, and for that reason he

constructed a Geissler pump after he moved to 468 Grand

Street, which was in 1877. Again, if this lamp has been

in his possession since before 1872, as he and his son swear,

why was it not shown to Mr. Crosby, of the American

Company, when he visited his shop in 1881 and was

much interested in his lamps? Why was it not shown

to Mr. Curtis, the leading counsel for the defendants in

the New York cases, when he was asked to produce a

lamp and promised to do so? Why did not his son take

this lamp to Mr. Bull's office in 1892, when he took the

old fiddle-bow lamps, 1, 2, and 3? Why did not his son

take this lamp to Mr. Eaton's office in 1882, when he tried

to negotiate the sale of his father's inventions to the

Edison Company? A lamp so constructed and made before 

1872 was worth a large sum of money to those interested

in defeating the Edison patent like the American

Company, and Goebel was not a rich man. Both he and

one of his sons were employed in 1881 by the American

Company. Why did he not show this lamp to McMahon

when he called in the interest of the American Company

and talked over the electrical matters? When Mr.

Dreyer tried to organize a company in 1882, and procured

an option from him of all his inventions relating

to electric lighting for which $925 was paid, and when

an old lamp of this kind was of vital consequence and

would have insured a fortune, why was it not

forthcoming? Mr. Dreyer asked Goebel to produce an old

lamp, and was especially anxious to find one pending

his negotiations with the Edison Company for the sale

of Goebel's inventions. Why did he not produce this

lamp in his interviews with Bohm, of the American Company,

or Moses, of the Edison Company, when it was for

his interest to do so? The value of such an anticipation

of the Edison lamp was made known to him. He was

desirous of realizing upon his inventions. He was proud

of his incandescent lamps, and was pleased to talk about

them with anybody who would listen. Is it conceivable

under all these circumstances, that he should have had

this all-important lamp in his possession from 1872 to

1893, and yet no one have heard of it or seen it except

his son? It cannot be said that ignorance of the English

language offers an excuse. He knew English very well

although Bohm and Dreyer conversed with him in German.

His children spoke English. Neither his ignorance

nor his simplicity prevented him from taking out

three patents: the first in 1865 for a sewing-machine

hemmer, and the last in 1882 for an improvement in

incandescent lamps. If he made Lamp No. 4 previous to

1872, why was it not also patented?



"There are other circumstances which throw doubt

on this alleged Goebel anticipation. The suit against the

United States Electric Lighting Company was brought

in the Southern District of New York in 1885. Large

interests were at stake, and the main defence to the

Edison patent was based on prior inventions. This

Goebel claim was then investigated by the leading counsel

for the defence, Mr. Curtis. It was further inquired into

in 1892, in the case against the Sawyer-Man Company.

It was brought to the attention and considered by the

Edison Company in 1882. It was at that time known to

the American Company, who hoped by this means to

defeat the monopoly under the Edison patent. Dreyer

tried to organize a company for its purchase. Young

Goebel tried to sell it. It must have been known to

hundreds of people. And now when the Edison Company

after years of litigation, leaving but a short time for the

patent to run, have obtained a final adjudication establishing

its validity, this claim is again resurrected to defeat

the operation of the judgment so obtained. A court

in equity should not look with favor on such a defence.

Upon the evidence here presented, I agree with the first

impression of Mr. Curtis and with the opinion of Mr.

Dickerson that whatever Goebel did must be considered

as an abandoned experiment.



"It has often been laid down that a meritorious invention

is not to be defeated by something which rests

in speculation or experiment, or which is rudimentary or

incomplete.



"The law requires not conjecture, but certainty. It

is easy after an important invention has gone into public

use for persons to come forward with claims that they

invented the same thing years before, and to endeavor

to establish this by the recollection of witnesses as to

events long past. Such evidence is to be received with

great caution, and the presumption of novelty arising

from the grant of the patent is not to be overcome except

upon clear and convincing proof.



"When the defendant company entered upon the

manufacture of incandescent lamps in May, 1891, it well

knew the consequences which must follow a favorable

decision for the Edison Company in the New York case."





The injunction was granted.



Other courts took practically the same view of the

Goebel story as was taken by Judge Colt, and the

injunctions asked in behalf of the Edison interests

were granted on all applications except one in St.

Louis, Missouri, in proceedings instituted against a

strong local concern of that city.



Thus, at the eleventh hour in the life of this important

patent, after a long period of costly litigation,

Edison and his associates were compelled to assume

the defensive against a claimant whose utterly baseless

pretensions had already been thoroughly investigated

and rejected years before by every interested

party, and ultimately, on examination by the

courts, pronounced legally untenable, if not indeed

actually fraudulent. Irritating as it was to be forced

into the position of combating a proposition so well

known to be preposterous and insincere, there was

nothing else to do but to fight this fabrication with

all the strenuous and deadly earnestness that would

have been brought to bear on a really meritorious

defence. Not only did this Goebel episode divert

for a long time the energies of the Edison interests

from activities in other directions, but the cost of

overcoming the extravagantly absurd claims ran up

into hundreds of thousands of dollars.



Another quotation from Major Eaton is of interest

in this connection:



"Now a word about the Goebel case. I took personal

charge of running down this man and his pretensions

in the section of the city where he lived and

among his old neighbors. They were a typical East

Side lot--ignorant, generally stupid, incapable of

long memory, but ready to oblige a neighbor and to

turn an easy dollar by putting a cross-mark at the

bottom of a forthcoming friendly affidavit. I can

say in all truth and justice that their testimony

was utterly false, and that the lawyers who took it

must have known it.



"The Goebel case emphasizes two defects in the

court procedure in patent cases. One is that they

may be spun out almost interminably, even, possibly,

to the end of the life of the patent; the other is that

the judge who decides the case does not see the witnesses.

That adverse decision at St. Louis would

never have been made if the court could have seen

the men who swore for Goebel. When I met Mr. F.

P. Fish on his return from St. Louis, after he had

argued the Edison side, he felt keenly that disadvantage,

to say nothing of the hopeless difficulty of educating

the court."



In the earliest days of the art, when it was apparent

that incandescent lighting had come to stay, the

Edison Company was a shining mark at which the

shafts of the dishonest were aimed. Many there were

who stood ready to furnish affidavits that they or

some one else whom they controlled had really invented

the lamp, but would obligingly withdraw and

leave Edison in possession of the field on payment of

money. Investigation of these cases, however, revealed

invariably the purely fraudulent nature of all

such offers, which were uniformly declined.



As the incandescent light began to advance rapidly

in public favor, the immense proportions of the future

market became sufficiently obvious to tempt

unauthorized persons to enter the field and become

manufacturers. When the lamp became a thoroughly

established article it was not a difficult matter to

copy it, especially when there were employees to be

hired away at increased pay, and their knowledge

utilized by the more unscrupulous of these new

competitors. This is not conjecture but known to be a

fact, and the practice continued many years, during

which new lamp companies sprang up on every side.

Hence, it is not surprising that, on the whole, the

Edison lamp litigation was not less remarkable for

quantity than quality. Between eighty and ninety

separate suits upon Edison's fundamental lamp and

detail patents were brought in the courts of the

United States and prosecuted to completion.



In passing it may be mentioned that in England

France, and Germany also the Edison fundamental

lamp patent was stubbornly fought in the judicial

arena, and his claim to be the first inventor of

practical incandescent lighting was uniformly sustained

in all those countries.



Infringement was not, however, confined to the

lamp alone, but, in America, extended all along the

line of Edison's patents relating to the production

and distribution of electric light, including those on

dynamos, motors, distributing systems, sockets,

switches, and other details which he had from time

to time invented. Consequently, in order to protect

its interests at all points, the Edison Company had

found it necessary to pursue a vigorous policy of

instituting legal proceedings against the infringers of

these various patents, and, in addition to the large

number of suits on the lamp alone, not less than one

hundred and twenty-five other separate actions,

involving some fifty or more of Edison's principal

electric-lighting patents, were brought against concerns

which were wrongfully appropriating his ideas

and actively competing with his companies in the

market.



The ramifications of this litigation became so

extensive and complex as to render it necessary to

institute a special bureau, or department, through

which the immense detail could be systematically

sifted, analyzed, and arranged in collaboration with

the numerous experts and counsel responsible for the

conduct of the various cases. This department was

organized in 1889 by Major Eaton, who was at this

time and for some years afterward its general counsel.



In the selection of the head of this department a

man of methodical and analytical habit of mind was

necessary, capable of clear reasoning, and at the same

time one who had gained a thoroughly practical

experience in electric light and power fields, and the

choice fell upon Mr. W. J. Jenks, the manager of the

Edison central station at Brockton, Massachusetts.

He had resigned that position in 1885, and had spent

the intervening period in exploiting the Edison

municipal system of lighting, as well as taking an

active part in various other branches of the Edison

enterprises.



Thus, throughout the life of Edison's patents on

electric light, power, and distribution, the interminable

legal strife has continued from day to day, from

year to year. Other inventors, some of them great

and notable, have been coming into the field since

the foundation of the art, patents have multiplied

exceedingly, improvement has succeeded improvement,

great companies have grown greater, new concerns

have come into existence, coalitions and mergers

have taken place, all tending to produce changes in

methods, but not much in diminution of patent

litigation. While Edison has not for a long time

past interested himself particularly in electric light

and power inventions, the bureau which was initiated

under the old regime in 1889 still continues, enlarged

in scope, directed by its original chief, but now conducted

under the auspices of several allied companies

whose great volumes of combined patents (including

those of Edison) cover a very wide range of the

electrical field.



As the general conception and theory of a lawsuit

is the recovery of some material benefit, the lay mind

is apt to conceive of great sums of money being

awarded to a complainant by way of damages upon

a favorable decision in an important patent case. It

might, therefore, be natural to ask how far Edison

or his companies have benefited pecuniarily by reason

of the many belated victories they have scored

in the courts. To this question a strict regard for

truth compels the answer that they have not been

benefited at all, not to the extent of a single dollar,

so far as cash damages are concerned.



It is not to be denied, however, that substantial

advantages have accrued to them more or less directly

through the numerous favorable decisions obtained

by them as a result of the enormous amount

of litigation, in the prosecution of which so great a

sum of money has been spent and so concentrated an

amount of effort and time lavished. Indeed, it would

be strange and unaccountable were the results otherwise.

While the benefits derived were not directly

pecuniary in their nature, they were such as tended

to strengthen commercially the position of the rightful

owners of the patents. Many irresponsible and

purely piratical concerns were closed altogether;

others were compelled to take out royalty licenses;

consolidations of large interests were brought about;

the public was gradually educated to a more correct

view of the true merits of conflicting claims, and,

generally speaking, the business has been greatly

unified and brought within well-defined and controllable

lines.



Not only in relation to his electric light and power

inventions has the progress of Edison and his associates

been attended by legal controversy all through

the years of their exploitation, but also in respect to

other inventions, notably those relating to the phonograph

and to motion pictures.



The increasing endeavors of infringers to divert into

their own pockets some of the proceeds arising from

the marketing of the devices covered by Edison's inventions

on these latter lines, necessitated the institution

by him, some years ago, of a legal department which,

as in the case of the light inventions, was designed to

consolidate all law and expert work and place it under

the management of a general counsel. The department

is of considerable extent, including a number of

resident and other associate counsel, and a general

office staff, all of whom are constantly engaged from

day to day in patent litigation and other legal work

necessary to protect the Edison interests. Through

their labors the old story is reiterated in the contesting

of approximate but conflicting claims, the never-

ending effort to suppress infringement, and the

destruction as far as possible of the commercial pirates

who set sail upon the seas of all successful enterprises.

The details, circumstances, and technical

questions are, of course, different from those relating

to other classes of inventions, and although there has

been no cause celebre concerning the phonograph and

motion-picture patents, the contention is as sharp and

strenuous as it was in the cases relating to electric

lighting and heavy current technics.



Mr. Edison's storage battery and the poured cement

house have not yet reached the stage of great commercial

enterprises, and therefore have not yet risen

to the dignity of patent litigation. If, however, the

experience of past years is any criterion, there will

probably come a time in the future when, despite

present widely expressed incredulity and contemptuous

sniffs of unbelief in the practicability of his ideas

in these directions, ultimate success will give rise to

a series of hotly contested legal conflicts such as have

signalized the practical outcome of his past efforts

in other lines.



When it is considered what Edison has done, what

the sum and substance of his contributions to human

comfort and happiness have been, the results, as

measured by legal success, have been pitiable. With

the exception of the favorable decision on the incandescent

lamp filament patent, coming so late, however,

that but little practical good was accomplished,

the reader may search the law-books in vain for a

single decision squarely and fairly sustaining a single

patent of first order. There never was a monopoly in

incandescent electric lighting, and even from the

earliest days competitors and infringers were in the

field reaping the benefits, and though defeated in the

end, paying not a cent of tribute. The market was

practically as free and open as if no patent existed.

There never was a monopoly in the phonograph;

practically all of the vital inventions were deliberately

appropriated by others, and the inventor was

laughed at for his pains. Even so beautiful a process

as that for the duplication of phonograph records was

solemnly held by a Federal judge as lacking invention

--as being obvious to any one. The mere fact

that Edison spent years of his life in developing that

process counted for nothing.



The invention of the three-wire system, which, when

it was first announced as saving over 60 per cent. of

copper in the circuits, was regarded as an utter

impossibility--this patent was likewise held by a Federal

judge to be lacking in invention. In the motion-

picture art, infringements began with its very

birth, and before the inevitable litigation could be

terminated no less than ten competitors were in the

field, with whom compromises had to be made.



In a foreign country, Edison would have undoubtedly

received signal honors; in his own country he

has won the respect and admiration of millions; but

in his chosen field as an inventor and as a patentee

his reward has been empty. The courts abroad have

considered his patents in a liberal spirit and given him

his due; the decisions in this country have fallen wide

of the mark. We make no criticism of our Federal

judges; as a body they are fair, able, and hard-

working; but they operate under a system of procedure

that stifles absolutely the development of inventive

genius.



Until that system is changed and an opportunity

offered for a final, swift, and economical adjudication

of patent rights, American inventors may well hesitate

before openly disclosing their inventions to the

public, and may seriously consider the advisability

of retaining them as "trade secrets."


