





CHAPTER XXIII



MISCELLANEOUS INVENTIONS



IT has been the endeavor in this narrative to group

Edison's inventions and patents so that his work in

the different fields can be studied independently and

separately. The history of his career has therefore

fallen naturally into a series of chapters, each aiming

to describe some particular development or art; and,

in a way, the plan has been helpful to the writers while

probably useful to the readers. It happens, however,

that the process has left a vast mass of discovery and

invention wholly untouched, and relegates to a

concluding brief chapter some of the most interesting

episodes of a fruitful life. Any one who will turn to the

list of Edison patents at the end of the book will find

a large number of things of which not even casual

mention has been made, but which at the time occupied

no small amount of the inventor's time and attention,

and many of which are now part and parcel of modern

civilization. Edison has, indeed, touched nothing

that he did not in some way improve. As Thoreau

said: "The laws of the Universe are not indifferent,

but are forever on the side of the most sensitive," and

there never was any one more sensitive to the defects

of every art and appliance, nor any one more active in

applying the law of evolution. It is perhaps this

many-sidedness of Edison that has impressed the multitude,

and that in the "popular vote" taken a couple

of years ago by the New York Herald placed his name

at the head of the list of ten greatest living Americans.

It is curious and pertinent to note that a similar

plebiscite taken by a technical journal among its expert

readers had exactly the same result. Evidently the

public does not agree with the opinion expressed by

the eccentric artist Blake in his "Marriage of Heaven

and Hell," when he said: "Improvement makes

strange roads; but the crooked roads without improvements

are roads of Genius."



The product of Edison's brain may be divided into

three classes. The first embraces such arts and industries,

or such apparatus, as have already been treated.

The second includes devices like the tasimeter, phonomotor,

odoroscope, etc., and others now to be noted.

The third embraces a number of projected inventions,

partially completed investigations, inventions in use

but not patented, and a great many caveats filed in

the Patent Office at various times during the last forty

years for the purpose of protecting his ideas pending

their contemplated realization in practice. These

caveats served their purpose thoroughly in many

instances, but there have remained a great variety of

projects upon which no definite action was ever taken.

One ought to add the contents of an unfinished piece

of extraordinary fiction based wholly on new inventions

and devices utterly unknown to mankind. Some

day the novel may be finished, but Edison has no

inclination to go back to it, and says he cannot under-

stand how any man is able to make a speech or write

a book, for he simply can't do it.



After what has been said in previous chapters, it

will not seem so strange that Edison should have

hundreds of dormant inventions on his hands. There

are human limitations even for such a tireless worker

as he is. While the preparation of data for this chapter

was going on, one of the writers in discussing with

him the vast array of unexploited things said: "Don't

you feel a sense of regret in being obliged to leave so

many things uncompleted?" To which he replied:

"What's the use? One lifetime is too short, and I am

busy every day improving essential parts of my established

industries." It must suffice to speak briefly of

a few leading inventions that have been worked out,

and to dismiss with scant mention all the rest, taking

just a few items, as typical and suggestive,

especially when Edison can himself be quoted as to

them. Incidentally it may be noted that things, not

words, are referred to; for Edison, in addition to

inventing the apparatus, has often had to coin the word

to describe it. A large number of the words and

phrases in modern electrical parlance owe their origin

to him. Even the "call-word" of the telephone,

"Hello!" sent tingling over the wire a few million

times daily was taken from Menlo Park by men installing

telephones in different parts of the world, men

who had just learned it at the laboratory, and thus

made it a universal sesame for telephonic conversation.



It is hard to determine where to begin with Edison's

miscellaneous inventions, but perhaps telegraphy has

the "right of line," and Edison's work in that field

puts him abreast of the latest wireless developments

that fill the world with wonder. "I perfected a system

of train telegraphy between stations and trains

in motion whereby messages could be sent from the

moving train to the central office; and this was the

forerunner of wireless telegraphy. This system was

used for a number of years on the Lehigh Valley Railroad

on their construction trains. The electric wave

passed from a piece of metal on top of the car across

the air to the telegraph wires; and then proceeded to

the despatcher's office. In my first experiments with

this system I tried it on the Staten Island Railroad,

and employed an operator named King to do the

experimenting. He reported results every day, and

received instructions by mail; but for some reason he

could send messages all right when the train went in

one direction, but could not make it go in the contrary

direction. I made suggestions of every kind to get

around this phenomenon. Finally I telegraphed King

to find out if he had any suggestions himself; and I

received a reply that the only way he could propose

to get around the difficulty was to put the island on

a pivot so it could be turned around! I found the

trouble finally, and the practical introduction on the

Lehigh Valley road was the result. The system was

sold to a very wealthy man, and he would never sell

any rights or answer letters. He became a spiritualist

subsequently, which probably explains it." It is

interesting to note that Edison became greatly interested

in the later developments by Marconi, and is an admiring

friend and adviser of that well-known inventor.



The earlier experiments with wireless telegraphy at

Menlo Park were made at a time when Edison was

greatly occupied with his electric-light interests, and

it was not until the beginning of 1886 that he was able

to spare the time to make a public demonstration of

the system as applied to moving trains. Ezra T.

Gilliland, of Boston, had become associated with him

in his experiments, and they took out several joint

patents subsequently. The first practical use of the

system took place on a thirteen-mile stretch of the

Staten Island Railroad with the results mentioned

by Edison above.



A little later, Edison and Gilliland joined forces with

Lucius J. Phelps, another investigator, who had been

experimenting along the same lines and had taken

out several patents. The various interests were combined

in a corporation under whose auspices the system

was installed on the Lehigh Valley Railroad,

where it was used for several years. The official

demonstration trip on this road took place on October

6, 1887, on a six-car train running to Easton, Pennsylvania,

a distance of fifty-four miles. A great many

telegrams were sent and received while the train was

at full speed, including a despatch to the "cable king,"

John Pender. London, England, and a reply from

him.[17]





[17] Broadly described in outline, the system consisted of an induction

circuit obtained by laying strips of tin along the top or

roof of a railway car, and the installation of a special telegraph

line running parallel with the track and strung on poles of only

medium height. The train and also each signalling station were

equipped with regulation telegraphic apparatus, such as battery,

key, relay, and sounder, together with induction-coil and condenser.

In addition, there was a transmitting device in the shape of a

musical reed, or buzzer. In practice, this buzzer was continuously

operated at high speed by a battery. Its vibrations were broken

by means of a key into long and short periods, representing Morse

characters, which were transmitted inductively from the train

circuit to the pole line, or vice versa, and received by the operator

at the other end through a high-resistance telephone receiver

inserted in the secondary circuit of the induction-coil.





Although the space between the cars and the pole

line was probably not more than about fifty feet, it is

interesting to note that in Edison's early experiments

at Menlo Park he succeeded in transmitting messages

through the air at a distance of 580 feet. Speaking of

this and of his other experiments with induction

telegraphy by means of kites, communicating from one to

the other and thus from the kites to instruments on

the earth, Edison said recently: "We only transmitted

about two and one-half miles through the kites.

What has always puzzled me since is that I did not

think of using the results of my experiments on

`etheric force' that I made in 1875. I have never

been able to understand how I came to overlook them.

If I had made use of my own work I should have had

long-distance wireless telegraphy."



In one of the appendices to this book is given a brief

technical account of Edison's investigations of the

phenomena which lie at the root of modern wireless

or "space" telegraphy, and the attention of the reader

is directed particularly to the description and quotations

there from the famous note-books of Edison's experiments

in regard to what he called "etheric force."

It will be seen that as early as 1875 Edison detected

and studied certain phenomena--i.e., the production

of electrical effects in non-closed circuits, which for a

time made him think he was on the trail of a new

force, as there was no plausible explanation for them

by the then known laws of electricity and magnetism.

Later came the magnificent work of Hertz identifying

the phenomena as "electromagnetic waves" in the

ether, and developing a new world of theory and

science based upon them and their production by

disruptive discharges.



Edison's assertions were treated with scepticism by

the scientific world, which was not then ready for the

discovery and not sufficiently furnished with corroborative

data. It is singular, to say the least, to note

how Edison's experiments paralleled and proved in

advance those that came later; and even his apparatus

such as the "dark box" for making the tiny sparks

visible (as the waves impinged on the receiver) bears

close analogy with similar apparatus employed by

Hertz. Indeed, as Edison sent the dark-box apparatus

to the Paris Exposition in 1881, and let Batchelor

repeat there the puzzling experiments, it seems by no

means unlikely that, either directly or on the report of

some friend, Hertz may thus have received from

Edison a most valuable suggestion, the inventor

aiding the physicist in opening up a wonderful new

realm. In this connection, indeed, it is very interesting

to quote two great authorities. In May, 1889, at

a meeting of the Institution of Electrical Engineers in

London, Dr. (now Sir) Oliver Lodge remarked in a

discussion on a paper of his own on lightning conductors,

embracing the Hertzian waves in its treatment:

"Many of the effects I have shown--sparks in unsuspected

places and other things--have been observed

before. Henry observed things of the kind and Edison

noticed some curious phenomena, and said it was not

electricity but `etheric force' that caused these sparks;

and the matter was rather pooh-poohed. It was a

small part of THIS VERY THING; only the time was not

ripe; theoretical knowledge was not ready for it."

Again in his "Signalling without Wires," in giving

the history of the coherer principle, Lodge remarks:

"Sparks identical in all respects with those discovered

by Hertz had been seen in recent times both by Edison

and by Sylvanus Thompson, being styled `etheric

force' by the former; but their theoretic significance

had not been perceived, and they were somewhat

sceptically regarded." During the same discussion in

London, in 1889, Sir William Thomson (Lord Kelvin),

after citing some experiments by Faraday with his

insulated cage at the Royal Institution, said: "His

(Faraday's) attention was not directed to look for

Hertz sparks, or probably he might have found them

in the interior. Edison seems to have noticed something

of the kind in what he called `etheric force.'

His name `etheric' may thirteen years ago have

seemed to many people absurd. But now we are all

beginning to call these inductive phenomena `etheric.'

"With which testimony from the great Kelvin

as to his priority in determining the vital fact, and

with the evidence that as early as 1875 he built apparatus

that demonstrated the fact, Edison is probably

quite content.



It should perhaps be noted at this point that a

curious effect observed at the laboratory was shown

in connection with Edison lamps at the Philadelphia

Exhibition of 1884. It became known in scientific

parlance as the "Edison effect," showing a curious

current condition or discharge in the vacuum of the

bulb. It has since been employed by Fleming in

England and De Forest in this country, and others,

as the basis for wireless-telegraph apparatus. It is in

reality a minute rectifier of alternating current, and

analogous to those which have since been made on a

large scale.



When Roentgen came forward with his discovery of

the new "X"-ray in 1895, Edison was ready for it, and

took up experimentation with it on a large scale; some

of his work being recorded in an article in the Century

Magazine of May, 1896, where a great deal of data may

be found. Edison says with regard to this work:

"When the X-ray came up, I made the first fluoroscope,

using tungstate of calcium. I also found that

this tungstate could be put into a vacuum chamber of

glass and fused to the inner walls of the chamber; and

if the X-ray electrodes were let into the glass chamber

and a proper vacuum was attained, you could get a

fluorescent lamp of several candle-power. I started in

to make a number of these lamps, but I soon found

that the X-ray had affected poisonously my assistant,

Mr. Dally, so that his hair came out and his flesh

commenced to ulcerate. I then concluded it would not

do, and that it would not be a very popular kind of

light; so I dropped it.



"At the time I selected tungstate of calcium because

it was so fluorescent, I set four men to making all kinds

of chemical combinations, and thus collected upward

of 8000 different crystals of various chemical combinations,

discovering several hundred different sub-

stances which would fluoresce to the X-ray. So far

little had come of X-ray work, but it added another

letter to the scientific alphabet. I don't know any

thing about radium, and I have lots of company."

The Electrical Engineer of June 3, 1896, contains a

photograph of Mr. Edison taken by the light of one of

his fluorescent lamps. The same journal in its issue

of April 1, 1896, shows an Edison fluoroscope in use

by an observer, in the now familiar and universal

form somewhat like a stereoscope. This apparatus as

invented by Edison consists of a flaring box, curved

at one end to fit closely over the forehead and eyes,

while the other end of the box is closed by a paste-

board cover. On the inside of this is spread a layer

of tungstate of calcium. By placing the object to be

observed, such as the hand, between the vacuum-tube

and the fluorescent screen, the "shadow" is formed on

the screen and can be observed at leisure. The apparatus

has proved invaluable in surgery and has become

an accepted part of the equipment of modern surgery.

In 1896, at the Electrical Exhibition in the Grand

Central Palace, New York City, given under the

auspices of the National Electric Light Association,

thousands and thousands of persons with the use of

this apparatus in Edison's personal exhibit were

enabled to see their own bones; and the resultant

public sensation was great. Mr. Mallory tells a

characteristic story of Edison's own share in the memorable

exhibit: "The exhibit was announced for opening

on Monday. On the preceding Friday all the apparatus,

which included a large induction-coil, was shipped

from Orange to New York, and on Saturday afternoon

Edison, accompanied by Fred Ott, one of his assistants,

and myself, went over to install it so as to have

it ready for Monday morning. Had everything been

normal, a few hours would have sufficed for completion

of the work, but on coming to test the big coil, it was

found to be absolutely out of commission, having been

so seriously injured as to necessitate its entire

rewinding. It being summer-time, all the machine shops

were closed until Monday morning, and there were

several miles of wire to be wound on the coil. Edison

would not consider a postponement of the exhibition,

so there was nothing to do but go to work and wind it

by hand. We managed to find a lathe, but there was

no power; so each of us, including Edison, took turns

revolving the lathe by pulling on the belt, while the

other two attended to the winding of the wire. We

worked continuously all through that Saturday night

and all day Sunday until evening, when we finished

the job. I don't remember ever being conscious of

more muscles in my life. I guess Edison was tired

also, but he took it very philosophically." This was

apparently the first public demonstration of the X-ray

to the American public.



Edison's ore-separation work has been already fully

described, but the story would hardly be complete

without a reference to similar work in gold extraction,

dating back to the Menlo Park days: "I got up a

method," says Edison, "of separating placer gold by

a dry process, in which I could work economically ore

as lean as five cents of gold to the cubic yard. I had

several car-loads of different placer sands sent to me

and proved I could do it. Some parties hearing I had

succeeded in doing such a thing went to work and got

hold of what was known as the Ortiz mine grant,

twelve miles from Santa Fe, New Mexico. This mine,

according to the reports of several mining engineers

made in the last forty years, was considered one of the

richest placer deposits in the United States, and

various schemes had been put forward to bring water

from the mountains forty miles away to work those

immense beds. The reports stated that the Mexicans

had been panning gold for a hundred years out of these

deposits.



"These parties now made arrangements with the

stockholders or owners of the grant, and with me, to

work the deposits by my process. As I had had some

previous experience with the statements of mining

men, I concluded I would just send down a small plant

and prospect the field before putting up a large one.

This I did, and I sent two of my assistants, whom I

could trust, down to this place to erect the plant; and

started to sink shafts fifty feet deep all over the area.

We soon learned that the rich gravel, instead of being

spread over an area of three by seven miles, and rich

from the grass roots down, was spread over a space of

about twenty-five acres, and that even this did not

average more than ten cents to the cubic yard. The

whole placer would not give more than one and one-

quarter cents per cubic yard. As my business

arrangements had not been very perfectly made, I lost

the usual amount."



Going to another extreme, we find Edison grappling

with one of the biggest problems known to the authorities

of New York--the disposal of its heavy snows.

It is needless to say that witnessing the ordinary slow

and costly procedure would put Edison on his mettle.

"One time when they had a snow blockade in New

York I started to build a machine with Batchelor--a

big truck with a steam-engine and compressor on it.

We would run along the street, gather all the snow up

in front of us, pass it into the compressor, and deliver

little blocks of ice behind us in the gutter, taking one-

tenth the room of the snow, and not inconveniencing

anybody. We could thus take care of a snow-storm

by diminishing the bulk of material to be handled.

The preliminary experiment we made was dropped

because we went into other things. The machine

would go as fast as a horse could walk."



Edison has always taken a keen interest in aerial

flight, and has also experimented with aeroplanes, his

preference inclining to the helicopter type, as noted

in the newspapers and periodicals from time to time.

The following statement from him refers to a type of

aeroplane of great novelty and ingenuity: "James

Gordon Bennett came to me and asked that I try

some primary experiments to see if aerial navigation

was feasible with `heavier-than-air' machines. I got

up a motor and put it on the scales and tried a large

number of different things and contrivances connected

to the motor, to see how it would lighten itself on the

scales. I got some data and made up my mind that

what was needed was a very powerful engine for its

weight, in small compass. So I conceived of an engine

employing guncotton. I took a lot of ticker paper

tape, turned it into guncotton and got up an engine

with an arrangement whereby I could feed this gun-

cotton strip into the cylinder and explode it inside

electrically. The feed took place between two copper

rolls. The copper kept the temperature down, so that

it could only explode up to the point where it was in

contact with the feed rolls. It worked pretty well;

but once the feed roll didn't save it, and the flame

went through and exploded the whole roll and kicked

up such a bad explosion I abandoned it. But the

idea might be made to work."



Turning from the air to the earth, it is interesting to

note that the introduction of the underground Edison

system in New York made an appeal to inventive

ingenuity and that one of the difficulties was met as

follows: "When we first put the Pearl Street station

in operation, in New York, we had cast-iron junction-

boxes at the intersections of all the streets. One

night, or about two o'clock in the morning, a policeman

came in and said that something had exploded

at the corner of William and Nassau streets. I happened

to be in the station, and went out to see what it

was. I found that the cover of the manhole, weighing

about 200 pounds, had entirely disappeared, but

everything inside was intact. It had even stripped

some of the threads of the bolts, and we could never

find that cover. I concluded it was either leakage of

gas into the manhole, or else the acid used in pickling

the casting had given off hydrogen, and air had leaked

in, making an explosive mixture. As this was a pretty

serious problem, and as we had a good many of the

manholes, it worried me very much for fear that it

would be repeated and the company might have to

pay a lot of damages, especially in districts like that

around William and Nassau, where there are a good

many people about. If an explosion took place in the

daytime it might lift a few of them up. However, I

got around the difficulty by putting a little bottle of

chloroform in each box, corked up, with a slight hole

in the cork. The chloroform being volatile and very

heavy, settled in the box and displaced all the air. I

have never heard of an explosion in a manhole where

this chloroform had been used. Carbon tetrachloride,

now made electrically at Niagara Falls, is very cheap

and would be ideal for the purpose."



Edison has never paid much attention to warfare,

and has in general disdained to develop inventions for

the destruction of life and property. Some years ago,

however, he became the joint inventor of the Edison-

Sims torpedo, with Mr. W. Scott Sims, who sought his

co-operation. This is a dirigible submarine torpedo

operated by electricity. In the torpedo proper, which

is suspended from a long float so as to be submerged

a few feet under water, are placed the small electric

motor for propulsion and steering, and the explosive

charge. The torpedo is controlled from the shore or

ship through an electric cable which it pays out as it

goes along, and all operations of varying the speed,

reversing, and steering are performed at the will of the

distant operator by means of currents sent through

the cable. During the Spanish-American War of 1898

Edison suggested to the Navy Department the adoption

of a compound of calcium carbide and calcium

phosphite, which when placed in a shell and fired from

a gun would explode as soon as it struck water and

ignite, producing a blaze that would continue several

minutes and make the ships of the enemy visible for

four or five miles at sea. Moreover, the blaze could

not be extinguished.



Edison has always been deeply interested in

"conservation," and much of his work has been directed

toward the economy of fuel in obtaining electrical

energy directly from the consumption of coal. Indeed,

it will be noted that the example of his handwriting

shown in these volumes deals with the importance of

obtaining available energy direct from the combustible

without the enormous loss in the intervening stages

that makes our best modern methods of steam generation

and utilization so barbarously extravagant and

wasteful. Several years ago, experimenting in this

field, Edison devised and operated some ingenious

pyromagnetic motors and generators, based, as the

name implies, on the direct application of heat to the

machines. The motor is founded upon the principle

discovered by the famous Dr. William Gilbert--court

physician to Queen Elizabeth, and the Father of

modern electricity--that the magnetic properties of

iron diminish with heat. At a light-red heat, iron

becomes non-magnetic, so that a strong magnet exerts

no influence over it. Edison employed this peculiar

property by constructing a small machine in which a

pivoted bar is alternately heated and cooled. It is

thus attracted toward an adjacent electromagnet

when cold and is uninfluenced when hot, and as the

result motion is produced.



The pyromagnetic generator is based on the same

phenomenon; its aim being of course to generate electrical

energy directly from the heat of the combustible.

The armature, or moving part of the machine, consists

in reality of eight separate armatures all constructed

of corrugated sheet iron covered with asbestos and

wound with wire. These armatures are held in place

by two circular iron plates, through the centre of

which runs a shaft, carrying at its lower extremity a

semicircular shield of fire-clay, which covers the ends

of four of the armatures. The heat, of whatever origin,

is applied from below, and the shaft being revolved,

four of the armatures lose their magnetism

constantly, while the other four gain it, so to speak.

As the moving part revolves, therefore, currents of

electricity are set up in the wires of the armatures and

are collected by a commutator, as in an ordinary

dynamo, placed on the upper end of the central shaft.



A great variety of electrical instruments are

included in Edison's inventions, many of these in

fundamental or earlier forms being devised for his systems

of light and power, as noted already. There are

numerous others, and it might be said with truth that

Edison is hardly ever without some new device of this

kind in hand, as he is by no means satisfied with the

present status of electrical measurements. He holds

in general that the meters of to-day, whether for heavy

or for feeble currents, are too expensive, and that

cheaper instruments are a necessity of the times.

These remarks apply more particularly to what may

be termed, in general, circuit meters. In other classes

Edison has devised an excellent form of magnetic

bridge, being an ingenious application of the principles

of the familiar Wheatstone bridge, used so extensively

for measuring the electrical resistance of wires; the

testing of iron for magnetic qualities being determined

by it in the same way. Another special instrument

is a "dead beat" galvanometer which differs from the

ordinary form of galvanometer in having no coils or

magnetic needle. It depends for its action upon the

heating effect of the current, which causes a fine

platinum-iridium wire enclosed in a glass tube to

expand; thus allowing a coiled spring to act on a

pivoted shaft carrying a tiny mirror. The mirror as

it moves throws a beam of light upon a scale and the

indications are read by the spot of light. Most novel

of all the apparatus of this measuring kind is the

odoroscope, which is like the tasimeter described in

an earlier chapter, except that a strip of gelatine takes

the place of hard rubber, as the sensitive member.

Besides being affected by heat, this device is exceedingly

sensitive to moisture. A few drops of water or

perfume thrown on the floor of a room are sufficient

to give a very decided indication on the galvanometer

in circuit with the instrument. Barometers, hygrometers,

and similar instruments of great delicacy can

be constructed on the principle of the odoroscope;

and it may also be used in determining the character

or pressure of gases and vapors in which it has been

placed.



In the list of Edison's patents at the end of this

work may be noted many other of his miscellaneous

inventions, covering items such as preserving fruit

in vacuo, making plate-glass, drawing wire, and

metallurgical processes for treatment of nickel, gold, and

copper ores; but to mention these inventions separately

would trespass too much on our limited space

here. Hence, we shall leave the interested reader to

examine that list for himself.



From first to last Edison has filed in the United States

Patent Office--in addition to more than 1400 applications

for patents--some 120 caveats embracing not

less than 1500 inventions. A "caveat" is essentially

a notice filed by an inventor, entitling him to receive

warning from the Office of any application for a patent

for an invention that would "interfere" with his own,

during the year, while he is supposed to be perfecting

his device. The old caveat system has now been

abolished, but it served to elicit from Edison a most

astounding record of ideas and possible inventions

upon which he was working, and many of which he of

course reduced to practice. As an example of Edison's

fertility and the endless variety of subjects engaging

his thoughts, the following list of matters covered by

ONE caveat is given. It is needless to say that all the

caveats are not quite so full of "plums," but this is

certainly a wonder.



Forty-one distinct inventions relating to the phonograph,

covering various forms of recorders, arrangement

of parts, making of records, shaving tool, adjustments,

etc.



Eight forms of electric lamps using infusible earthy

oxides and brought to high incandescence in vacuo by

high potential current of several thousand volts; same

character as impingement of X-rays on object in bulb.



A loud-speaking telephone with quartz cylinder and

beam of ultra-violet light.



Four forms of arc light with special carbons.



A thermostatic motor.



A device for sealing together the inside part and

bulb of an incandescent lamp mechanically.



Regulators for dynamos and motors.



Three devices for utilizing vibrations beyond the

ultra violet.



A great variety of methods for coating incandescent

lamp filaments with silicon, titanium, chromium,

osmium, boron, etc.



Several methods of making porous filaments.



Several methods of making squirted filaments of a

variety of materials, of which about thirty are specified.



Seventeen different methods and devices for separating

magnetic ores.



A continuously operative primary battery.



A musical instrument operating one of Helmholtz's

artificial larynxes.



A siren worked by explosion of small quantities of

oxygen and hydrogen mixed.



Three other sirens made to give vocal sounds or

articulate speech.



A device for projecting sound-waves to a distance

without spreading and in a straight line, on the principle

of smoke rings.



A device for continuously indicating on a galvanometer

the depths of the ocean.



A method of preventing in a great measure friction

of water against the hull of a ship and incidentally

preventing fouling by barnacles.



A telephone receiver whereby the vibrations of the

diaphragm are considerably amplified.



Two methods of "space" telegraphy at sea.



An improved and extended string telephone.



Devices and method of talking through water for

considerable distances.



An audiphone for deaf people.



Sound-bridge for measuring resistance of tubes and

other materials for conveying sound.



A method of testing a magnet to ascertain the existence

of flaws in the iron or steel composing the same.



Method of distilling liquids by incandescent conductor

immersed in the liquid.



Method of obtaining electricity direct from coal.



An engine operated by steam produced by the

hydration and dehydration of metallic salts.



Device and method for telegraphing photographically.



Carbon crucible kept brilliantly incandescent by

current in vacuo, for obtaining reaction with refractory

metals.



Device for examining combinations of odors and

their changes by rotation at different speeds.



From one of the preceding items it will be noted

that even in the eighties Edison perceived much advantage

to be gained in the line of economy by the use

of lamp filaments employing refractory metals in their

construction. From another caveat, filed in 1889, we

extract the following, which shows that he realized the

value of tungsten also for this purpose. "Filaments

of carbon placed in a combustion tube with a little

chloride ammonium. Chloride tungsten or titanium

passed through hot tube, depositing a film of metal on

the carbon; or filaments of zirconia oxide, or alumina

or magnesia, thoria or other infusible oxides mixed or

separate, and obtained by moistening and squirting

through a die, are thus coated with above metals and

used for incandescent lamps. Osmium from a volatile

compound of same thus deposited makes a filament

as good as carbon when in vacuo."



In 1888, long before there arose the actual necessity

of duplicating phonograph records so as to produce

replicas in great numbers, Edison described in one of

his caveats a method and process much similar to the

one which was put into practice by him in later years.

In the same caveat he describes an invention whereby

the power to indent on a phonograph cylinder, instead

of coming directly from the voice, is caused by power

derived from the rotation or movement of the phonogram

surface itself. He did not, however, follow up

this invention and put it into practice. Some twenty

years later it was independently invented and patented

by another inventor. A further instance of this kind

is a method of telegraphy at sea by means of a diaphragm

in a closed port-hole flush with the side of the

vessel, and actuated by a steam-whistle which is controlled

by a lever, similarly to a Morse key. A receiving

diaphragm is placed in another and near-by chamber,

which is provided with very sensitive stethoscopic

ear-pieces, by which the Morse characters sent from

another vessel may be received. This was also invented

later by another inventor, and is in use to-day,

but will naturally be rivalled by wireless telegraphy.

Still another instance is seen in one of Edison's caveats,

where he describes a method of distilling liquids by

means of internally applied heat through electric

conductors. Although Edison did not follow up the idea

and take out a patent, this system of distillation was

later hit upon by others and is in use at the present

time.



In the foregoing pages of this chapter the authors

have endeavored to present very briefly a sketchy

notion of the astounding range of Edison's practical

ideas, but they feel a sense of impotence in being unable

to deal adequately with the subject in the space

that can be devoted to it. To those who, like the

authors, have had the privilege of examining the

voluminous records which show the flights of his

imagination, there comes a feeling of utter inadequacy

to convey to others the full extent of the story they

reveal.



The few specific instances above related, although

not representing a tithe of Edison's work, will probably

be sufficient to enable the reader to appreciate

to some extent his great wealth of ideas and fertility

of imagination, and also to realize that this imagination

is not only intensely practical, but that it works

prophetically along lines of natural progress.


