


Ancient Law
by Henry Maine


Chapter 6

The Early History of Testamentary Succession

    If an attempt were made to demonstrate in England the
superiority of the historical method of investigation to the
modes of inquiry concerning Jurisprudence which are in fashion
among us, no department of Law would better serve as an example
than Testaments or Wills. Its capabilities it owes to its great
length and great continuity. At the beginning of its history we
find ourselves in the very infancy of the social state,
surrounded by conceptions which it requires some effort of mind
to realise in their ancient form; while here, at the other
extremity of its line of progress, we are in the midst of legal
notions which are nothing more than those same conceptions
disguised by the phraseology and by the habits of thought which
belong to modern times, and exhibiting therefore a difficulty of
another kind, the difficulty of believing that ideas which form
part of our everyday mental stock can really stand in need of
analysis and examination. The growth of the Law of Wills between
these extreme points can be traced with remarkable distinctness.
It was much less interrupted at the epoch of the birth of
feudalism, than the history of most other branches of law. It is,
indeed, true that, as regards all provinces of jurisprudence, the
break caused by the division between ancient and modern history,
or in other words by the dissolution of the Roman empire, has
been very greatly exaggerated. Indolence has disinclined many
writers to be at the pains of looking for threads of connection
entangled and obscured by the confusions of six troubled
centuries, while other inquirer, not naturally deficient in
patience and industry, have been misled by idle pride in the
legal system of their country, and by consequent unwillingness to
confess its obligations to the jurisprudence of Rome. But these
unfavourable influences have had comparatively little effect on
the province of Testamentary Law. The barbarians were confessedly
strangers to any such conception as that of a Will. The best
authorities agree that there is no trace of it in those parts of
their written code which comprise the customs practised by them
in their original seats, and in their subsequent settlements on
the edge of the Roman empire. But soon after they became mixed
with the population of the Roman provinces they appropriated from
the Imperial jurisprudence the conception of a Will, at first in
part, and afterwards in all its integrity. The influence of the
Church had much to do with this rapid assimilation. The
ecclesiastical power had very early succeeded to those privilege
of custody and registration of Testaments which several of the
heathen temples had enjoyed; and even thus early it was almost
exclusively to private bequests that the religious foundations
owed their temporal possessions. Hence it is that the decrees of
the earliest Provincial Councils perpetually contain anathemas
against those who deny the sanctity of Wills. Here, in England,
Church influence was certainly chief among the causes which by
universal acknowledgment have prevented that discontinuity in the
history of Testamentary Law, which is sometimes believed to exist
in the history of other provinces of Jurisprudence. The
jurisdiction over one class of Wills was delegated to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, which applied to them, though not always
intelligently, the principles of Roman jurisprudence; and, though
neither the courts of Common Law nor the Court of Chancery owned
any positive obligation to follow the Ecclesiastical tribunals,
they could not escape the potent influence of a system of settled
rules in course of application by their side. The English law of
testamentary succession to personalty has become a modified form
of the dispensation under which the inheritances of Roman
citizens w ere administered. 
    It is not difficult to point out the extreme difference of
the conclusions forced on us by the historical treatment of the
subject from those to which we are conducted when, without the
help of history, we merely strive to analyse our prima facie
impressions. I suppose there is nobody who, starting from the
popular or even the legal conception of a Will, would not imagine
that certain qualities are necessarily attached to it. He would
say, for example, that a Will necessarily take effect at death
only -- that it is secret, not known as a matter of course to
persons taking interests under its provisions that it is
revocable, i.e. always capable of being superseded by a new act
of testation. Yet I shall be able to show that there was a time
when none of these characteristic belonged to a Will. The
Testaments from which our Wills are directly descended at first
took effect immediately on their execution; they were not secret;
they were not revocable. Few legal agencies are, in fact, the
fruit of more complex historical agencies than that by which a
man's written intentions control the posthumous disposition of
his goods. Testaments very slowly and gradually gathered round
them the qualities I have mentioned; and they did this from
causes and under pressure of events which may be called casual,
or which at any rate have no interest for us at present, except
so far as they have affected the history of law. 
    At a time when legal theories were more abundant than at
present -- theories which, it is true, were for the most part
gratuitous and premature enough, but which nevertheless rescued
jurisprudence from that worse and more ignoble condition, not
unknown to ourselves, in which nothing like a generalisation is
aspired to, and law is regarded as a mere empirical pursuit -- it
was the fashion to explain the ready and apparently intuitive
perception which we have of certain qualities in a Will, by
saying that they were natural to it, or, as the phrase would run
in full, attached to it by the Law of Nature. Nobody, I imagine,
would affect to maintain such a doctrine, when once it was
ascertained that all these characteristic had their origin within
historical memory; at the same time, vestiges of the theory of
which the doctrine is an offshoot, linger in forms of expression
which we all of us use and perhaps scarcely know how to dispense
with. I may illustrate this by mentioning a position common in
the legal literature of the seventeenth century. The jurists of
that period very commonly assert that the power of Testation
itself is of Natural Law, that it is a right conferred by the Law
of Nature. Their teaching, though all persons may not at once see
the connection, is in substance followed by those who affirm that
the right of dictating or controlling the posthumous disposal of
property is a necessary or natural consequence of the proprietary
rights themselves. And every student of technical jurisprudence
must have come across the same view, clothed in the language of a
rather different school, which, in its rationale of this
department of law, treats succession ex testamento as the mode of
devolution which the property of deceased persons ought primarily
to follow, and then proceeds to account for succession ab
intestato as the incidental provision of the lawgiver for the
discharge of a function which was only left unperformed through
the neglect or misfortune of the deceased proprietor. These
opinions are only expanded forms of the more compendious doctrine
that Testamentary disposition is an institution of the Law of
Nature. It is certainly never quite safe to pronounce
dogmatically as to the range of association embraced by modern
minds, when they reflect on Nature and her Law. but I believe
that most persons, who affirm that the Testamentary Power is of
Natural Law may be taken to imply either that, as a matter of
fact, it is universal, or that nations are prompted to sanction
it by an original instinct and impulse. With respect to the first
of these positions, I think that, when explicitly set forth, it
can never be seriously contended for in an age which has seen the
severe restraints imposed on the Testamentary Power by the Code
Napoleon, and has witnessed the steady multiplication of systems
for which the French codes have served as a model. To the second
assertion we must object that it is contrary to the
best-ascertained facts in the early history of law, and I venture
to affirm generally that, in all indigenous societies, a
condition of jurisprudence in which.Testamentary privileges are
not allowed, or rather not contemplated, has preceded that later
stage of legal development in which the mere will of the
proprietor is permitted under more or less of restriction to
override the claims of his kindred in blood. 
    The conception of a Will or Testament cannot be considered by
itself. It is a member, and not the first, of a series of
conceptions. In itself a Will is simply the instrument by which
the intention of the testator is declared. It must be clear, I
think, that before such an instrument takes its turn for
discussion, there are several preliminary points to be examined
-- as, for example, what is it, what sort of right or interest,
which passes from a dead man on his decease? to whom and in what
form does it pass? and how came it that the dead were allowed to
control the posthumous disposition of their property? Thrown into
technical language, the dependence of the various conceptions
which contribute to the notion of a Will is thus expressed. A
Will or Testament is an instrument by which the devolution of an
inheritance is prescribed. Inheritance is a form of universal
succession. A universal succession is a succession to a
universitas juris, or university of rights and duties. Inverting
this order we have therefore to inquire what is a universitas
juris; what is a universal succession; what is the form of
universal succession which is called an inheritance. And there
are also two further questions, independent to some extent of the
points I have mooted, but demanding solution before the subject
of Wills can be exhausted. These are, how came an inheritance to
be controlled in any case by the testator's volition, and what is
the nature of the instrument by which it came to be controlled? 
    The first question relates to the universitas juris; that is,
a university (or bundle) of rights and duties. A universitas
juris is a collection of rights and duties united by the single
circumstance of their having belonged at one time to some one
person. It is, as it were, the legal clothing of some given
individual. It is not formed by grouping together any rights and
any duties. It can only be constituted by taking all the rights
and all the duties of a particular person. The tie which so
connects a number of rights of property, rights of way, rights to
legacies, duties of specific performance, debts, obligations to
compensate wrongs -- which so connects all these legal privileges
and duties together as to constitute them a universitas juris, is
the fact of their having attached to some individual capable of
exercising them. Without this fact there is no university of
rights and duties. The expression universitas juris is not
classical, but for the notion jurisprudence is exclusively
indebted to Roman law; nor is it at all difficult to seize. We
must endeavour to collect under one conception the whole set of
legal relations in which each one of us stands to the rest of the
world. These, whatever be their character and composition, make
up together a universitas juris; and there is but little danger
of mistake in forming the notion, if we are only careful to
remember that duties enter into it quite as much as rights. Our
duties may overbalance our rights. A man may owe more than he is
worth, and therefore if a money value is set on his collective
legal relations he may be what is called insolvent. But for all
that the entire group of rights and duties which centres in him
is not the less a "juris universitas."
    We come next to a "universal succession." A universal
succession is a succession to a universitas juris. It occurs when
one man is invested with the legal clothing of another, becoming
at the same moment subject to all his liabilities and entitled to
all his rights. In order that the universal succession may be
true and perfect, the devolution must take place uno ictu, as the
jurists phrase it. It is of course possible to conceive one man
acquiring the whole of the rights and duties of another at
different periods, as for example by successive purchases; or he
might acquire them in different capacities, part as heir, part as
purchaser, part as legatee. But though the group of rights and
duties thus made up should in fact amount to the whole legal
personality of a particular individual, the acquisition would not
be a universal succession. In order that there may be a true
universal succession, the transmission must be such as to pass
the whole aggregate of rights and duties at the same moment and
in virtue of the same legal capacity in the recipient. The notion
of a universal succession, like that of a juris universitas, is
permanent in jurisprudence, though in the English legal system it
is obscured by the great variety of capacities in which rights
are acquired, and, above all, by the distinction between the two
great provinces of English property "realty" and "personalty."
The succession of an assignee in bankruptcy to the entire
property of the bankrupt is, however, a universal succession,
though as the assignee only pays debts to the extent of the
assets, this is only a modified form of the primary notion. Were
it common among us for persons to take assignments of all a man's
property on condition of paying all his debts, such transfers
would exactly resemble the universal successions known to the
oldest Roman Law. When a Roman citizen adrogated a son, i.e. took
a man, not already under Patria Potestas, as his adoptive child,
he succeeded universally to the adoptive child's estate, i.e. he
took all the property and became liable for all the obligations.
Several other forms of universal succession appear in the
primitive Roman Law, but infinitely the most important and the
most durable of all was that one with which we are more
immediately concerned, Hareditas or Inheritance. Inheritance was
a universal succession occurring at a death. The universal
successor was Hares or Heir. He stepped at once into all the
rights and all the duties of the dead man. He was instantly
clothed with his entire legal person, and I need scarcely add
that the special character of the Hares remained the same,
whether he was named by a Will or whether he took on an
Intestacy. The term Hares is no more emphatically used of the
Intestate than of the Testamentary Heir, for the manner in which
a man became Hares had nothing to do with the legal character he
sustained. The dead man's universal successor, however he became
so, whether by Will or by Intestacy, was his Heir. But the Heir
was not necessarily a single person. A group of persons
considered in law as a single unit, might succeed as co-heirs to
the Inheritance. 
    Let me now quote the usual Roman definition of an
Inheritance. The reader will be in a position to appreciate the
full force of the separate terms. Haereditas est successio in
universum jus quod defunctus habuit ("an inheritance is a
succession to the entire legal position of a deceased man"). The
notion was that, though the physical person of the deceased had
perished, his legal personality survived and descended unimpaired
on his Heir or Co-heirs, in whom his identity (so far as the law
was concerned) was continued. Our own law, in constituting the
Executor or Administrator the representative of the deceased to
the extent of his personal assets, may serve as an illustration
of the theory from which it emanated, but, although it
illustrates, it does not explain it. The view of even the later
Roman Law required a closeness of correspondence between the
position of the deceased and of his Heir which is no feature of
an English representation; and in the primitive jurisprudence
everything turned on the continuity of succession. Unless
provision was made in the will for the instant devolution of the
testator's rights and duties on the Heir or Co-heir, the
testament lost all its effect. In modern Testamentary
jurisprudence, as in the later Roman law, the object of first
importance is the execution of the testator's intentions. In the
ancient law of Rome the subject of corresponding carefulness was
the bestowal of the Universal Succession. One of these rules
seems to our eyes a principle dictated by common sense, while the
other looks very much like an idle crotchet. Yet that without the
second of them the first would never have come into being is as
certain as any proposition of the kind can be. 
    In order to solve this apparent paradox, and to bring into
greater clearness the train of ideas which I have been
endeavouring to indicate, I must borrow the results of the
inquiry which was attempted in the earlier portion of the
preceding chapter. We saw one peculiarity invariably
distinguishing the infancy of society. Men are regarded and
treated, not as individuals, but always as members of a
particular group. Everybody is first a citizen, and then, as a
citizen, he is a member of his order -- of an aristocracy or a
democracy, of an order of patricians or plebeians; or, in those
societies which an unhappy fate has afflicted with a special
perversion in their course of development, of a caste. Next, he
is a member of a gens, house, or clan; and lastly he is a member
of his family. This last was the narrowest and most personal
relation in which he stood; nor, paradoxical as it may seem, was
he ever regarded as himself, as a distinct individual. His
individuality was swallowed up in his family. I repeat the
definition of a primitive society given before. It has for its
units, not individuals, but groups of men united by the reality
or the fiction of blood-relationship. 
    It is in the peculiarities of an undeveloped society that we
seize the first trace of a universal succession. Contrasted with
the organisation of a modern state, the commonwealth of primitive
times may be fairly described as consisting of a number of little
despotic governments, each perfectly distinct from the rest, each
absolutely controlled by the prerogative of a single monarch. But
though the Patriarch, for we must not yet call him the
Pater-familias, had rights thus extensive, it is impossible to
doubt that he lay under an equal amplitude of obligations. If he
governed the family, it was for its behoof. If he was lord of its
possessions, he held them as trustee for his children and
kindred. He had no privilege or position distinct from that
conferred on him by his relation to the petty commonwealth which
he governed. The Family, in fact, was a Corporation; and he was
its representative or, we might almost say, its Public officer.
He enjoyed rights and stood under duties, but the rights and the
duties were, in the contemplation of his fellow-citizens and in
the eye of the law, quite as much those of the collective body as
his own. Let us consider for a moment the effect which would be
produced by the death of such a representative. In the eye of the
law, in the view of the civil magistrate, the demise of the
domestic authority would be a perfectly immaterial event. The
person representing the collective body of the family and
primarily responsible to municipal jurisdiction would bear a
different name; and that would be all. The rights and obligations
which attached to the deceased head of the house would attach,
without breach of continuity, to his successor; for, in point of
fact, they would be the rights and obligations of the family, and
the family had the distinctive characteristic of a corporation --
that it never died. Creditors would have the same remedies
against the new chieftain as against the old, for the liability
being that of the still existing family would be absolutely
unchanged. All rights available to the family would be as
available after the demise of the headship as before it -- except
that the Corporation would be obliged -- if indeed language so
precise and technical can be properly used of these early times
-- would be obliged to sue under a slightly modified name. 
    The history of jurisprudence must be followed in its whole
course, if we are to understand how gradually and tardily society
dissolved itself into the component atoms of which it is now
constituted -- by what insensible gradations the relation of man
to man substituted itself for the relation of the individual to
his family and of families to each other. The point now to be
attended to is that even when the revolution had apparently quite
accomplished itself, even when the magistrate had in great
measure assumed the place of the Pater-familias, and the civil
tribunal substituted itself for the domestic forum, nevertheless
the whole scheme of rights and duties administered by the
judicial authorities remained shaped by the influence of the
obsolete privileges and coloured in every part by their
reflection. There seems. little question that the devolution of
the Universitas Juris, so strenuously insisted upon by the Roman
Law as the first condition of a testamentary or intestate
succession, was a feature of the older form of society which
men's minds had been unable to dissociate from the new, though
with that newer phase it had no true or proper connection. It
seems, in truth, that the prolongation of a man's legal existence
in his heir, or in a group of co-heirs, is neither more nor less
than a characteristic of the family transferred by a fiction to
the individual. Succession in corporations is necessarily
universal, and the family was a corporation. Corporations never
die. The decease of individual members makes no difference to the
collective existence of the aggregate body, and does not in any
way affect its legal incidents, its faculties or liabilities. Now
in the idea of a Roman universal succession all these qualities
of a corporation seem to have been transferred to the individual
citizen. His physical death is allowed to exercise no effect on
the legal position which he filled, apparently on the principle
that that position is to be adjusted as closely as possible to
the analogies of a family, which, in its corporate character, was
not of course liable to physical extinction. 
    I observe that not a few continental jurists have much
difficulty in comprehending the nature of the connection between
the conceptions blended in a universal succession, and there is
perhaps no topic in the philosophy of jurisprudence on which
their speculations, as a general rule, possess so little value.
But the student of English law ought to be in no danger of
stumbling at the analysis of the idea which we are examining.
Much light is cast upon it by a fiction in our own system with
which all lawyers are familiar. English lawyers classify
corporations as Corporations aggregate and Corporations sole. A
Corporation aggregate is a true Corporation, but a Corporation
sole is an individual, being a member of a series of individuals,
who is invested by a fiction with the qualities of a Corporation.
I need hardly cite the King or the Parson of a Parish as
instances of Corporations sole. The capacity or office is here
considered apart from the particular person who from time to time
may occupy it, and, this capacity being perpetual, the series of
individuals who fill it are clothed with the leading attribute of
Corporations-Perpetuity. Now in the older theory of Roman Law the
individual bore to the family precisely the same relation which
in the rationale of English jurisprudence a Corporation sole
bears to a Corporation aggregate. The derivation and association
of ideas are exactly the same. In fact, if we say to ourselves
that for purposes of Roman Testamentary Jurisprudence each
individual citizen was a Corporation sole, we shall not only
realise the full conception of an inheritance, but have
constantly at command the clue to the assumption in which it
originated. It is an axiom with us that the King never dies,
being a Corporation sole. His capacities are instantly filled by
his successor, and the continuity of dominion is not deemed to
have been interrupted. With the Romans it seemed an equally
simple and natural process, to eliminate the fact of death from
the devolution of rights and obligations. The testator lived on
in his heir or in the group of his co-heir. He was in law the
same person with them, and if any one in his testamentary
dispositions had even constructively violated the principle which
united his actual and his posthumous existence, the law rejected
the defective instrument, and gave the inheritance to the kindred
in blood, whose capacity to fulfil the conditions of heirship was
conferred on them by the law itself, and not by any document
which by possibility might be erroneously framed. 
    When a Roman citizen died intestate or leaving no valid Will,
his descendants or kindred became his heirs according to a scale
which will be presently described. The person or class of persons
who succeeded did not simply represent the deceased, but, in
conformity with the theory just delineated, they continued his
civil life, his legal existence. The same results followed when
the order of succession was determined by a Will, but the theory
of the identity between the dead man and his heirs was certainly
much older than any form of Testament or phase of Testamentary
jurisprudence. This indeed is the proper moment for suggesting a
doubt which will press on us with greater force the further we
plumb the depths of this subject, -- whether wills would ever
have come into being at all if it had not been for these
remarkable ideas connected with universal succession.
Testamentary law is the application of a principle which may be
explained on a variety of philosophical hypotheses as plausible
as they are gratuitous: it is interwoven with every part of
modern society, and it is defensible on the broadest grounds of
general expediency. But the warning can never be too often
repeated, that the grand source of mistake in questions of
jurisprudence is the impression that those reasons which actuate
us at the present moment, in the maintenance of an existing
institution, have necessarily anything in common with the
sentiment in which the institution originated. It is certain
that, in the old Roman Law of Inheritance, the notion of a will
or testament is inextricably mixed up, I might almost say
confounded, with the theory of a man's posthumous existence in
the person of his heir. 
    The conception of a universal succession, firmly as it has
taken root in jurisprudence, has not occurred spontaneously to
the framers of every body of laws. Wherever it is now found, it
may be shown to have descended from Roman law; and with it have
come down a host of legal rules on the subject of Testaments
and.Testamentary gifts, which modern practitioners apply without
discerning their relation to the parent theory. But, in the pure
Roman jurisprudence, the principle that a man lives on in his
Heir -- the elimination, if we may so speak, of the fact of death
-- is too obviously for mistake the centre round which the whole
Law of Testamentary and Intestate succession is circling. The
unflinching sternness of the Roman law in enforcing compliance
with the governing theory would in itself suggest that the theory
grew out of something in the primitive constitution of Roman
society; but we may push the proof a good way beyond the
presumption. It happens that several technical expressions,
dating from the earliest institution of Wills at Rome, have been
accidentally preserved to us. We have in Gaius the formula of
investiture by which the universal successor was created. We have
the ancient name by which the person afterwards called Heir was
at first designated. We have further the text of the celebrated
clause in the Twelve Tables by which the Testamentary power was
expressly recognised, and the clauses regulating Intestate
Succession have also been preserved. All these archaic phrases
have one salient peculiarity. They indicate that what passed from
the Testator to the Heir was the Family, that is, the aggregate
of rights and duties contained in the Patria Potestas and growing
out of it. The material property is in three instances not
mentioned at all; in two others, it is visibly named as an
adjunct or appendage of the Family. The original Will or
Testament was therefore an instrument, or (for it was probably
not at first in writing) a proceeding, by which the devolution of
the Family was regulated. It was a mode of declaring who was to
have the chieftainship, in succession to the Testator. When Wills
are understood to have this for their original object, we see at
once how it is that they came to be connected with one of the
most curious relics of ancient religion and law, the sacra, or
Family Rites. These sacra were the Roman form of an institution
which shows itself wherever society has not wholly shaken itself
free from its primitive clothing. They are the sacrifices and
ceremonies by which the brotherhood of the family is
commemorated, the pledge and the witness of its perpetuity.
Whatever be their nature, -- whether it be true or not that in
all cases they are the worship of some mythical ancestor, -- they
are everywhere employed to attest the sacredness of the
family-relation; and therefore they acquire prominent
significance and importance, whenever the continuous existence of
the Family is endangered by a change in the person of its chief.
Accordingly we hear most about them in connection with demises of
domestic sovereignty. Among the Hindoos, the right to inherit a
dead man's property is exactly co-extensive with the duty of
performing his obsequies. If the rites are not properly performed
or not performed by the proper person, no relation is considered
as established between the deceased and anybody surviving him;
the Law of Succession does not apply, and nobody can inherit the
property. Every great event in the life of a Hindoo seems to be
regarded as leading up to and bearing upon those solemnities. If
he marries, it is to have children who may celebrate them after
his death; if he has no children, he lies under the strongest
obligation to adopt them from another family, "with a view,"
writes the Hindoo doctor, "to the funeral cake, the water, and
the solemn sacrifice." The sphere preserved to the Roman sacra in
the time of Cicero, was not less in extent. It embraced
Inheritances and Adoptions. No Adoption was allowed to take place
without due provision for the sacra of the family from which the
adoptive son was transferred, and no Testament was allowed to
distribute an Inheritance without a strict apportionment of the
expenses of these ceremonies among the different co-heirs. The
differences between the Roman law at this epoch, when we obtain
our last glimpse of the sacra, and the existing Hindoo system,
are most instructive. Among the Hindoos, the religious element in
law has acquired a complete predominance. Family sacrifices have
become the keystone of all the Law of Persons and much of the Law
of Things. They have even received a monstrous extension, for it
is a plausible opinion that the self-immolation of the widow at
her husband's funeral, a practice continued to historical times
by the Hindoos, and commemorated in the traditions of several
Indo-European races, was an addition grafted on the primitive
sacra, under the influence of the impression, which always
accompanies the idea of sacrifice, that human blood is the most
precious of all oblations. With the Romans, on the contra, the
legal obligation and the religious duty have ceased to be
blended. The necessity of solemnising the sacra forms no part of
the theory of civil law but they are under the separate
jurisdiction of the College of Pontiffs. The letters of Cicero to
Atticus, which are full of allusions to them, leave no doubt that
they constituted an intolerable burden on Inheritances; but the
point of development at which law breaks away from religion has
been passed, and we are prepared for their entire disappearance
from the later jurisprudence. 
    In Hindoo law there is no such thing as a true Will. The
place filled by Wills is occupied by Adoptions. We can now see
the relation of the Testamentary Power to the Faculty of
Adoption, and the reason why the exercise of either of them could
call up a peculiar solicitude for the performance of the sacra.
Both a Will and an Adoption threaten a distortion of the ordinary
course of Family descent, but they are obviously contrivances for
preventing the descent being wholly interrupted, when there is no
succession of kindred to carry it on. Of the two expedients
Adoption, the factitious creation of blood-relationship, is the
only one which has suggested itself to the greater part of
archaic societies. The Hindoos have indeed advanced one point on
what was doubtless the antique practice, by allowing the widow to
adopt when the father has neglected to do so, and there are in
the local customs of Bengal some faint traces of the Testamentary
powers. But to the Romans belongs pre-eminently the credit of
inventing the Will, the institution which, next to the Contract,
has exercised the greatest influence in transforming human
society. We must be careful not to attribute to it in its
earliest shape the functions which have attended it in more
recent times. It was at first, not a mode of distributing a dead
man's goods, but one among several ways of transferring the
representation of the household to a new chief. The goods descend
no doubt to the Heir, but that is only because the government of
the family carries with it in its devolution the power of
disposing of the common stock. We are very far as yet from that
stage in the history of Wills in which they become powerful
instruments in modifying society through the stimulus they give
to the circulation of property and the plasticity they produce in
proprietary rights. No such consequences as these appear in fact
to have been associated with the Testamentary power even by the
latest Roman lawyer. It will be found that Wills were never
looked upon in the Roman community as a contrivance for parting
Property and the Family, or for creating a variety of
miscellaneous interests, but rather as a means of making a better
provision for the members of a household than could be secured
through the rules of Intestate succession. We may suspect indeed
that the associations of a Roman with the practice of willmaking
were extremely different from those familiar to us nowadays. The
habit of regarding Adoption and Testation as modes of continuing
the Family cannot but have had something to do with the singular
laxity of Roman notions as to the inheritance of sovereignty It
is impossible not to see that the succession of the early Roman
Emperors to each other was considered reasonably regular, and
that, in spite of all that had occurred, no absurdity attached to
the pretension of such Princes as Theodosius or Justinian to
style themselves Caesar and Augustus. 
    When the phenomena of primitive societies emerge into light,
it seems impossible to dispute a proposition which the jurists of
the seventeenth century considered doubtful, that Intestate
Inheritance is a more ancient institution than Testamentary
Succession. As soon as this is settled, a question of much
interest suggests itself, how and under what conditions were the
directions of a will first allowed to regulate the devolution of
authority over the household, and consequently the posthumous
distribution of property. The difficulty of deciding the point
arises from the rarity of Testamentary power in archaic
communities. It is doubtful whether a true power of testation was
known to any original society except the Roman. Rudimentary forms
of it occur here and there, but most of them are not exempt from
the suspicion of a Roman origin. The Athenian will was, no doubt,
indigenous, but then, as will appear presently, it was only an
inchoate Testament. As to the Wills which are sanctioned by the
bodies of law which have descended to us as the codes of the
barbarian conquerors of Imperial Rome, they are almost certainly
Roman. The most penetrating German criticism has recently been
directed to these leges Barbarorum, the great object of
investigation being to detach those portions of each system which
formed the customs of the tribe in its original home from the
adventitious ingredients which were borrowed from the laws of the
Romans. In the course of this process, one result has invariably
disclosed itself, that the ancient nucleus of the code contains
no trace of a Will. Whatever testamentary law exists, has been
taken from Roman jurisprudence. Similarly, the rudimentary
Testament which (as I am informed) the Rabbinical Jewish law
provides for, has been attributed to contact with the Romans. The
only form of testament, not belonging to a Roman or Hellenic
society, which can reasonably be supposed indigenous, is that
recognised by the usages of the province of Bengal; and the
testament of Bengal is only a rudimentary Will. 
    The evidence, however, such as it is, seems to point to the
conclusion that Testaments are at first only allowed to take
effect on failure of the persons entitled to have the inheritance
by right of blood genuine or fictitious. Thus, when Athenian
citizens were empowered for the first time by the Laws of Solon
to execute Testaments, they were forbidden to disinherit their
direct male descendants. So, too, the Will of Bengal is only
permitted to govern the succession so far as it is consistent
with certain overriding claims of the family. Again, the original
institutions of the Jews having provided nowhere for the
privileges of Testatorship, the later Rabbinical jurisprudence,
which pretends to supply the casus omissi of the Mosaic law,
allows the Power of Testation to attach when all the kindred
entitled under the Mosaic system to succeed have failed or are
undiscoverable. The limitations by which the ancient German codes
hedge in the testamentary jurisprudence which has been
incorporated with them are also significant, and point in the
same direction. It is the peculiarity of most of these German
laws, in the only shape in which we know them, that, besides the
allod or domain of each household, they recognise several
subordinate kinds or orders of property, each of which probably
represents a separate transfusion of Roman principles into the
primitive body of Teutonic usage. The primitive German or
allodial property is strictly reserved to the kindred. Not only
is it incapable of being disposed of by testament but it is
scarcely capable of being alienated by conveyance inter vivos.
The ancient German law, like the Hindoo jurisprudence, makes the
male children co-proprietor with their father, and the endowment
of the family cannot be parted with except by the consent of all
its members. But the other sorts of property, of more modern
origin and lower dignity than the allodial possessions, are much
more easily alienated than they, and follow much more lenient
rules of devolution. Women and the descendants of women succeed
to them, obviously on the principle that they lie outside the
sacred precinct of the Agnatic brotherhood. Now it is on these
last descriptions of property, and on these only, that the
Testaments borrowed from Rome were at first allowed to operate. 
    These few indications may serve to lend additional
plausibility to that which in itself appears to be the most
probable explanation of an ascertained fact in the early history
of Roman Wills. We have it stated on abundant authority that
Testaments, during the primitive period of the Roman State, were
executed in the Comitia Calata, that is, in the Comitia Curiata,
or Parliament of the Patrician Burghers of Rome, when assembled
for Private Business. This mode of execution has been the source
of the assertion, handed down by one generation of civilians to
another, that every Will at one era of Roman history was a solemn
legislative enactment. But there is no necessity whatever for
resorting to an explanation which has the defect of attributing
far too much precision to the proceedings of the ancient assembly
The proper key to the story concerning the execution of wills in
the Comitia Calata must no doubt be sought in the oldest Roman
Law of intestate succession. The canons of primitive Roman
jurisprudence regulating the inheritance of relations from each
other were, so long as they remained unmodified by the Edictal
Law of the Praetor, to the following effect: -- First, the sui or
direct descendants who had never been emancipated succeeded. On
the failure of the sui, the Nearest Agnate came into their place,
that is, the nearest person or class of the kindred who was or
might have been under the same Patria Potestas with the deceased.
The third and last degree came next, in which the inheritance
devolved on the gentiles, that is on the collective members of
the dead man's gens or House. The House, I have explained
already, was a fictitious extension of the family, consisting of
all Roman Patrician citizens who bore the same name, and who, on
the ground of bearing the same name, were supposed to be
descended from a common ancestor. Now the Patrician Assembly
called the Comitia Curiata was a Legislature in which Gentes or
Houses were exclusively represented. It was a representative
assembly of the Roman people, constituted on the assumption that
the constituent unit of the state was the Gens. This being so,
the inference seems inevitable, that the cognizance of Wills by
the Comitia was connected with the rights of the Gentiles, and
was intended to secure them in their privilege of ultimate
inheritance. The whole apparent anomaly is removed, if we suppose
that a Testament could only be made when the testator had no
gentiles discoverable, or when they waived their claims, and that
every Testament was submitted to the General Assembly of the
Roman Gentes, in order that those aggrieved by its dispositions
might put their veto upon it if they pleased, or by allowing it
to pass might be presumed to have renounced their reversion. It
is possible that on the eve of the publication of the Twelve
Tables this vetoing power may have been greatly curtailed or only
occasionally and capriciously exercised. It is much easier,
however, to indicate the meaning ad origin of the jurisdiction
confided to the Comitia Calata, than to trace its gradual
development or progressive decay. 
    The Testament to which the pedigree of all modern Wills may
be traced is not, however, the Testament executed in the Calata
Comitia, but another Testament desired to compete with it and
destined to supersede it. The historical importance of this early
Roman Will, and the light it casts on much of ancient thought,
will excuse me for describing it at some length. 
    When the Testamentary power first discloses itself to us in
legal history, there are signs that, like almost all the great
Roman institutions, it was the subject of contention between the
Patricians and the Plebeians. The effect of the political maxim,
Plebs Gentem non habet, "a Plebeia cannot be a member of a
House," was entirely to exclude the Plebeians from the Comitia
Curiata. Some critics have accordingly supposed that a Plebeian
could not have his Will read or recited to the Patrician
Assembly, and was thus deprived of Testamentary privileges
altogether. Others have been satisfied to point out the hardships
of having to submit a proposed Will to the unfriendly
jurisdiction of an assembly in which the Testator was not
represented. Whatever be the true view, a form of Testament came
into use, which has all the characteristics of a contrivance
intended to evade some distasteful obligation. The Will in
question was a conveyance inter vivos, a complete and irrevocable
alienation of the Testator's family and substance to the person
whom he meant to be his heir. The strict rules of Roman law must
always have permitted such an alienation, but, when the
transaction was intended to have a posthumous effect, there may
have been disputes whether it was valid for Testamentary purposes
without the formal assent of the Patricia Parliament. If a
difference of opinion existed on the point between the two
classes of the Roman population, it was extinguished, with many
other sources of heartburning, by the great Decemviral
compromise. The text of the Twelve Tables is still extant which
says, "Pater familias uti de pecunia tutelave rei suae legassit,
ita jus esto" -- a law which can hardly have had any other object
than the legalisation of the Plebeian Will. 
    It is well known to scholars that, centuries after the
Patrician Assembly had ceased to be the legislature of the Roman
State, it still continued to hold formal sittings for the
convenience of private business. Consequently, at a period long
subsequent to the publication of the Decemviral Law, there is
reason to believe that the Comitia Calata still assembled for the
validation of Testaments. Its probable functions may be best
indicated by saying that it was a Court of Registration, with the
understanding however that the Wills exhibited were not enrolled,
but simply recited to the members, who were supposed to take note
of their tenor and to commit them to memory. It is very likely
that this form of Testament was never reduced to writing at all,
but at all events if the Will had been originally written, the
office of the Comitia was certainly confined to hearing it read
aloud, the document being retained afterwards in the custody of
the Testator, or deposited under the safeguard of some religious
corporation. This publicity may have been one of the incidents of
the Testament executed in the Comitia Calata which brought it
into popular disfavour. In the early years of the Empire the
Comitia still held its meetings, but they seem to have lapsed
into the merest form, and few Wills, or none, were probably
presented at the periodical sitting. 
    It is the ancient Plebeian Will -- the alternative of the
Testament just described -- which in its remote effects has
deeply modified the civilisation of the modern world. It acquired
at Rome all the popularity which the Testament submitted to the
Calata Comitia appears to have lost. The key to all its
characteristics lies in its descent from the mancipium, or
ancient Roman conveyance, a proceeding to which we may
unhesitatingly assign the parentage of two great institutions
without which modern society can scarcely be supposed capable of
holding together, the Contract and the Will. The mancipium, or as
the word would exhibit itself in later Latinity, the Mancipation,
carries us back by its incidents to the infancy of civil society.
As it sprang from times long anterior, if not to the invention,
at all events to the popularisation, of the art of writing,
gestures, symbolical acts, and solemn phrases take the place of
documentary forms, and a lengthy and intricate ceremonial is
intended to call the attention of the parties to the importance
of the transaction, and to impress it on the memory of the
witnesses. The imperfection too of oral, as compared with
written, testimony necessitates the multiplication of the
witnesses and assistants beyond what in later times would be
reasonable or intelligible limits. 
    The Roman Mancipation required the presence first of all of
the parties, the vendor and vendee, or we should perhaps rather
say, if we are to use modern legal language, the grantor and
grantee. There were also no less than five witnesses; and an
anomalous personage, the Libripens, who brought with him a pair
of scales to weigh the uncoined copper money of ancient Rome. The
Testament we are considering -- the Testament per aes et libram,
"with the copper and the scales," as it long continued to be
technically called -- was an ordinary Mancipation with no change
in the form and hardly any in words. The Testator was the
grantor; the five witnesses and the libripens were present; and
the place of grantee was taken by a person known technically as
the familiae emptor, the Purchaser of the Family. The ordinary
ceremony of a Mancipation was then proceeded with. Certain formal
gestures were made and sentences pronounced. The Emptor familiae
simulated the payment of a price by striking the scales with a
piece of money, and finally the Testator ratified what had been
done in a set form of words called the "Nuncupatio" or
publication of the transaction, a phrase which, I need scarcely
remind the lawyer, has had a long history in Testamentary
jurisprudence. It is necessary to attend particularly to the
character of the person called familiae emptor. There is no doubt
that at first he was the Heir himself. The Testator conveyed to
him outright his whole "familia," that is, all the rights he
enjoyed over and through the family; his property, his slaves,
and all his ancestral privileges, together, on the other hand,
with all his duties and obligations. 
    With these data before us, we are able to note several
remarkable points in which the Mancipatory Testament, as it may
be called, differed in its primitive form from a modern will. As
it amounted to a conveyance out-and-out of the Testator's estate,
it was not revocable. There could be no new exercise of a power
which had been exhausted. 
    Again, it was not secret. The Familia Emptor, being himself
the Heir, knew exactly what his rights were, and was aware that
he was irreversibly entitled to the inheritance; a knowledge
which the violences inseparable from the best-ordered ancient
society rendered extremely dangerous. But perhaps the most
surprising consequence of this relation of Testaments to
Conveyances was the immediate vesting of the inheritance in the
Heir. This has seemed so incredible to not a few civilians, that
they have spoken of the Testator's estate as vesting
conditionally on the Testator's death or as granted to him from a
time uncertain, i.e. the death of the grantor. But down to the
latest period of Roman jurisprudence there was a certain class of
transactions which never admitted of being directly modified by a
condition, or of being limited to or from a point of time. In
technical language they did not admit conditio or dies.
Mancipation was one of them, and therefore, strange as it may
seem, we are forced to conclude that the primitive Roman Will
took effect at once, even though the Testator survived his act of
Testation. It is indeed likely that Roman citizens originally
made their Wills only in the article of death, and that a
provision for the continuance of the Family effected by a man in
the flower of life would take the form rather of an Adoption than
of a Will. Still we must believe that, if the Testator did
recover, he could only continue to govern his household by the
sufferance of his Heir. 
    Two or three remarks should be made before I explain how
these inconveniences were remedied, and how Testaments came to be
invested with the characteristics now universally associated with
them. The Testament was not necessarily written: at first, it
seems to have been invariably oral, and, even in later times, the
instrument declaratory of the bequests was only incidentally
connected with the Will and formed no essential part of it. It
bore in fact exactly the same relation to the Testament, which
the deed leading the uses bore to the Fines and Recoveries of old
English law, or which the charter of feoffment bore to the
feoffment itself. Previously, indeed, to the Twelve Tables, no
writing would have been of the slightest use, for the Testator
had no power of giving legacies, and the only persons who could
be advantaged by a will were the Heir or Co-heirs. But the
extreme generality of the clause in the Twelve Tables soon
produced the doctrine that the Heir must take the inheritance
burdened by any directions which the Testator might give him, or
in other words, take it subject to legacies. Written testamentary
instruments assumed thereupon a new value, as a security against
the fraudulent refusal of the heir to satisfy the legatees; but
to the last it was at the Testator's pleasure to rely exclusively
on the testimony of the witnesses, and to declare by word of
mouth the legacies which the familiae emptor was commissioned to
pay. 
    The terms of the expression Emptor familiae demand notice.
"Emptor" indicates that the Will was literally a sale, and the
word "familiae," when compared with the phraseology in the
Testamentary clause in the Twelve Tables, leads us to some
instructive conclusions. "Familia," in classical Latinity, means
always a man's slaves. Here, however, and generally in the
language of ancient Roman law it includes all persons under his
Potestas, and the Testator's material property or substance is
understood to pass as an adjunct or appendage of his household.
Turning to the law of the Twelve Tables, it will be seen that it
speaks of tutela rei suae, "the guardianship of his substance," a
form of expression which is the exact reverse of the phase just
examined. There does not therefore appear to be any mode of
escaping from the conclusion, that, even at an era so
comparatively recent as that of the Decemviral compromise, terms
denoting "household" and "property" were blended in the current
phraseology. If a man's household had been spoken of as his
property we might have explained the expression as pointing to
the extent of the Patria Potestas, but, as the interchange is
reciprocal, we must allow that the form of speech caries us back
to that primeval period in which property is owned by the family,
and the family is governed by the citizen, so that the member of
the community do not own their property and their family, but
rather own their property through their family. 
    At an epoch not easy to settle with precision, the Roman
Praetors fell into the habit of acting upon Testaments solemnised
in closer conformity with the spirit than the letter of the law.
Casual dispensations became insensibly the established practice,
till at length a wholly new form of Will was matured and
regularly engrafted on the Edictal Jurisprudence. The new or
Praetorian Testament derived the whole of its impregnability from
the Jus Honorarium or Equity of Rome. The Praetor of some
particular year must have inserted a clause in his inaugural
Proclamation declaratory of his intention to sustain all
Testaments which should have been executed with such and such
solemnities; and, the reform having been found advantageous, the
article relating to it must have been again introduced by the
Praetor's successor, and repeated by the next in office, till at
length it formed a recognised portion of that body of
jurisprudence which from these successive incorporations was
styled the Perpetual or Continuous Edict. On examining the
conditions of a valid Praetorian Will they will be plainly seen
to have been determined by the requirements of the Mancipatory
Testament, the innovating Praetor having obviously prescribed to
himself the retention of the old formalities just so far as they
were warrants of genuineness or securities against fraud. At the
execution of the Mancipatory Testament seven persons had been
present besides the Testator. Seven witnesses were accordingly
essential to the Praetorian Will: two of them corresponding to
the libripens and familiae emptor, who were now stripped of their
symbolical character, and were merely present for the purpose of
supplying their testimony. No emblematic ceremony was gone
through; the Will was merely recited; but then it is probable
(though not absolutely certain) that a written instrument was
necessary to perpetuate the evidence of the Testator's
dispositions. At all events, whenever a writing was read or
exhibited as a person's last Will, we know certainly that the
Praetorian Court would not Sustain it by special intervention,
unless each of the seven witnesses had severally affixed his seal
to the outside. This is the first appearance of sealing in the
history of jurisprudence, considered as a mode of authentication.
It is to be observed that the seals of Roman Wills, and other
documents of importance, did not simply serve as the index of the
presence or assent of the signatory, but were literally
fastenings which had to be broken before the writing could be
inspected. 
    The Edictal Law would therefore enforce the dispositions of a
Testator, when, instead of being symbolised through the forms of
mancipation, they were simply evidenced by the seals of seven
witnesses. But it may be laid down as a general proposition, that
the principal qualities of Roman property were incommunicable
except through processes which were supposed to be coeval with
the origin of the Civil Law. The Praetor therefore could not
confer an Inheritance on anybody. He could not place the Heir or
Co-heirs in that very relation in which the Testator had himself
stood to his own rights and obligations. All he could do was to
confer on the person designated as Heir the practical enjoyment
of the property bequeathed, and to give the force of legal
acquittances to his payments of the Testator's debts. When he
exerted his powers to these ends, the Praetor was technically
said to communicate the Bonorum Possessio. The Heir specially
inducted under these circumstances, or Bonorum Possessor had
every proprietary privilege of the Heir by the Civil Law. He took
the profits and he could alienate, but then, for all his remedies
for redress against wrong, he must go, as we should phrase it,
not to the Common Law, but to the Equity side of the Praetorian
Court. No great chance of error would be incurred by describing
him as having an equitable estate in the inheritance; but then,
to secure ourselves against being deluded by the analogy, we must
always recollect that in one year the Bonorum Possessio was
operated upon a principle of Roman Law known as Usucapion, and
the Possessor became Quiritarian owner of all the property
comprised in the inheritance. 
    We know too little of the older law of Civil Process to be
able to strike the balance of advantage and disadvantage between
the different classes of remedies supplied by the Praetorian
Tribunal. It is certain, however, that, in spite of its many
defects, the Mancipatory Testament by which the universitas juris
devolved at once and unimpaired was never entirely superseded by
the new Will; and at a period less bigoted to antiquarian forms,
and perhaps not quite alive to their significance, all the
ingenuity of the Jurisconsults seems to have been expended on the
improvement of the more venerable instrument. At the era of
Gaius, which is that of the Antonine Caesars, the great blemishes
of the Mancipatory Will had been removed. Originally, as we have
seen, the essential character of the formalities had required
that the Heir himself should be the purchaser of the Family, and
the consequence was that he not only instantly acquired a vested
interest in the Testator's Property, but was formally made aware
of his rights. But the age of Gaius permitted some unconcerned
person to officiate as Purchaser of the Family. The heir,
therefore, was not necessarily informed of the succession to
which he was destined; and Wills thenceforward acquired the
property of secrecy. The substitution of a stranger for the
actual Heir in the functions of "Familiae Emptor" had other
ulterior consequences. As soon as it was legalised, a Roman
Testament came to consist of two parts or stages -- a conveyance,
which was a pure form, and a Nuncupatio, or Publication. In this
latter passage of the proceeding, the Testator either orally
declared to the assistants the wishes which were to be executed
after his death, or produced a written document in which his
wishes were embodied. It was not probably till attention had been
quite drawn off from the imaginary Conveyance, and concentrated
on the Nuncupation as the essential part of the transaction, that
Wills were allowed to become revocable. 
    I have thus carried the pedigree of Wills some way down in
legal history. The root of it is the old Testament "with the
copper and the scales," founded on a Mancipation or Conveyance.
This ancient Will has, however, manifold defects, which are
remedied, though only indirectly, by the Praetorian law Meantime
the ingenuity of the Jurisconsults effects, in the Common-Law
Will or Mancipatory Testament, the very improvements which the
Praetor may have concurrently carried out in Equity. These last
ameliorations depend, however, on mere legal dexterity, and we
see accordingly that the Testamentary Law of the day of Gaius or
Ulpian is only transitional. What changes next ensued we know
not; but at length, just before the reconstruction of the
jurisprudence by Justinian, we find the subjects of the Eater
Roman Empire employing a form of Will of which the pedigree is
traceable to the Praetorian Testament on one side, and to the
Testament "with the copper and the scales" on the other. Like the
Testament of the Praetor, it required no Mancipation, and was
invalid unless sealed by seven witnesses. Like the Mancipatory
Will, it passed the Inheritance and not merely a Bonorum
Possessio. Several, however, of its most important features were
annexed by positive enactments, and it is out of regard to this
threefold derivation from the Praetorian Edict, from the Civil
Law, and from the Imperial Constitutions, that Justinian speaks
of the Law of Wills in his own day as Jus Tripertitum. The new
Testament thus described is the one generally known as the Roman
Will. But it was the Will of the Eastern Empire only and the
researches of Savigny have shown that in Western Europe the old
Mancipatory Testament, with all its apparatus of conveyance,
copper, and scales, continued to be the form in use far down in
the Middle Ages. 

