


Ancient Law
by Henry Maine

Chapter 7

Ancient and Modern Ideas Respecting Wills and Successions

    Although there is much in the modern European Law of Wills
which is intimately connected with the oldest rules of
Testamentary disposition practised among men, there are
nevertheless some important differences between ancient and
modern ideas on the subject of Wills and Successions. Some of the
points of difference I shall endeavour to illustrate in this
chapter. 
    At a period, removed several centuries from the era of the
Twelve Tables, we find a variety of rules engrafted on the Roman
Civil Law with the view of limiting the disinherison of children;
we have the jurisdiction of the Praetor very actively exerted in
the same interest; and we are also presented with a new remedy
very anomalous in character and of uncertain origin, called the
Querela Inofficiosi Testamenti, "the Plaint of an Unduteous
Will," directed to the reinstatement of the issue in inheritances
from which they had been unjustifiably excluded by a father's
Testament. Comparing this condition of the law with the text of
the Twelve Tables which concedes in terms the utmost liberty of
Testation, several writers have been tempted to interweave a good
deal of dramatic incident into their history of the Law
Testamentary. They tell us of the boundless license of
disinherison in which the heads of families instantly began to
indulge, of the scandal and injury to public morals which the new
practices engendered, and of the applause of all good men which
hailed the courage of the Praetor in arresting the progress of
paternal depravity. This story, which is not without some
foundation for the principal fact it relates, is often so told as
to disclose very serious misconceptions of the principles of
legal history. The Law of the Twelve Tables is to be explained by
the character of the age in which it was enacted. It does not
license a tendency which a later era thought itself bound to
counteract, but it proceeds on the assumption that no such
tendency exists, or, perhaps we should say, in ignorance of the
possibility of its existence. There is no likelihood that Roman
citizens began immediately to avail themselves freely of the
power to disinherit. It is against all reason and sound
appreciation of history to suppose that the yoke of family
bondage, still patiently submitted to, as we know, where its
pressure galled most cruelly, would be cast off in the very
particular in which its incidence in our own day is not otherwise
than welcome. The Law of the Twelve Tables permitted the
execution of Testaments in the only case in which it was thought
possible that they could be executed, viz. on failure of children
and proximate kindred. It did not forbid the disinherison of
direct descendants, inasmuch as it did not legislate against a
contingency which no Roman lawgiver of that era could have
contemplated. No doubt, as the offices of family affection
progressively lost the aspect of primary personal duties, the
disinherison of children was occasionally attempted. But the
interference of the Praetor, so far from being called for by the
universality of the abuse, was doubtless first prompted by the
fact that such instances of unnatural caprice were few and
exceptional, and at conflict with the current morality. 
    The indications furnished by this part of Roman Testamentary
Law are of a very different kind. It is remarkable that a Will
never seems to have been regarded by the Romans as a means of
disinheriting a Family, or of effecting the unequal distribution
of a patrimony. The rules of law preventing its being turned to
such a purpose, increase in number and stringency as the
jurisprudence unfolds itself; and these rules correspond
doubtless with the abiding sentiment of Roman society, as
distinguished from occasional variations of feeLing in
individuals. It would rather seem as if the Testamentary Power
were chiefly vaLued for the assistance it gave in making
provision for a Family, and in dividing the inheritance more
evenly and fairly than the Law of Intestate Succession would have
divided it. If this be the true reading of the general sentiment
on the point, it explains to some extent the singular horror of
Intestacy which always characterised the Roman. No evil seems to
have been considered a heavier visitation than the forfeiture of
Testamentary privileges; no curse appears to have been bitterer
than that which imprecated on an enemy that he might die without
a Will. The feeling has no counterpart, or none that is easily
recognisable, in the forms of opinion which exist at the present
day. All men at all times will doubtless prefer chalking out the
destination of their substance to having that office performed
for them by the law; but the Roman passion for Testacy is
distinguished from the mere desire to indulge caprice by its
intensity; and it has of course nothing whatever in common with
that pride of family, exclusively the creation of feudalism,
which accumulates one description of property in the hands of a
single representative. It is probable, a priori, that it was
something in the rules of Intestate Succession which caused this
vehement preference for the distribution of property under a
Testament over its distribution by law. The difficulty, however,
is, that on glancing at the Roman Law of Intestate Succession, in
the form which it wore for many centuries before Justinian shaped
it into that scheme of inheritance which has been almost
universally adopted by modern lawgivers, it by no means strikes
one as remarkably unreasonable or inequitable. On the contrary,
the distribution it prescribes is so fair and rational, and
differs so Little from that with which modern society has been
generally contented, that no reason suggests itself why it should
have been regarded with extraordinary distaste, especially under
a jurisprudence which pared down to a narrow compass the
testamentary privileges of persons who had children to provide
for. We should rather have expected that, as in France at this
moment, the heads of families would generally save themselves the
troubLe of executing a Will, and allow the Law to do as it
pleased with their assets. I think, however, if we look a little
closely at the pre-Justinianean scale of Intestate Succession, we
shall discover the key to the mystery. The texture of the law
consists of two distinct parts. One department of rules comes
from the Jus Civile, the Common-Law of Rome; the other from the
Edict of the Praetor. The Civil Law, as I have already stated for
another purpose, calLs to the inheritance only three orders of
successors in their turn; the Unemancipated children, the nearest
class of Agnatic kindred, and the Gentiles. Between these three
orders, the Praetor interpolates various classes of relatives, of
whom the Civil Law took no notice whatever. Ultimately, the
combination of the Edict and of the Civil Law forms a table of
succession not materially different from that which has descended
to the generality of modern codes. 
    The point for recollection is that there must anciently have
been a time at which the rules of the Civil Law determined the
scheme of Intestate Succession exclusively, and at which the
arrangements of the Edict were non-existent, or not consistently
carried out. We cannot doubt that, in its infancy, the Praetorian
jurisprudence had to contend with formidable obstructions, and it
is more than probable that, long after popular sentiment and
legal opinion had acquiesced in it, the modifications which it
periodically introduced were governed by no certain principles,
and fluctuated with the varying bias of successive magistrates.
The rules of Intestate Succession, which the Romans must at this
period have practised, account, I think -- and more than account
-- for that vehement distaste for an Intestacy to which Roman
society during so many ages remained constant. The order of
succession was this : on the death of a citizen, having no will
or no valid will, his Unemancipated children became his Heirs.
His emancipated sons had no share in the inheritance. If he left
no direct descendants living at his death, the nearest grade of
the Agnatic kindred succeeded, but no part of the inheritance was
given to any relative united (however closely) with the dead man
through female descents. All the other branches of the family
were excluded, and the inheritance escheated to the Gentiles, or
entire body of Roman citizens bearing the same name with the
deceased. So that on failing to execute an operative Testament, a
Roman of the era under examination left his emancipated children
absolutely without provision, while, on the assumption that he
died childless, there was imminent risk that his possessions
would escape from the family altogether, and devolve on a number
of persons with whom he was merely connected by the sacerdotal
fiction that assumed all members of the same gens to be descended
from a common ancestor. The prospect of such an issue is in
itself a nearly sufficient explanation of the popular sentiment;
but, in point of fact, we shall only half understand it, if we
forget that the state of things I have been describing is likely
to have existed at the very moment when Roman society was in the
first stage of its transition from its primitive organisation in
detached families. The empire of the father had indeed received
one of the earliest blows directed at it through the recognition
of Emancipation as a legitimate usage, but the law, still
considering the Patria Potestas to be the root of family
connection, persevered in looking on the emancipated children as
strangers to the rights of Kinship and aliens from the blood. We
cannot, however, for a moment suppose that the limitations of the
family imposed by legal pedantry had their counterpart in the
natural affection of parents. Family attachments must still have
retained that nearly inconceivable sanctity and intensity which
belonged to them under the Patriarchal system; and, so little are
they likely to have been extinguished by the act of emancipation,
that the probabilities are altogether the other way. It may be
unhesitatingly taken for granted that enfranchisement from the
father's power was a demonstration, rather than a severance, of
affection -- a mark of grace and favour accorded to the
best-beloved and most esteemed of the children. If sons thus
honoured above the rest were absolutely deprived of their
heritage by an Intestacy, the reluctance to incur it requires no
farther explanation. We might have assumed a priori that the
passion for Testacy was generated by some moral injustice
entailed by the rules of Intestate succession; and here we find
them at variance with the very instinct by which early society
was cemented together. It is possible to put all that has been
urged in a very succinct form. Every dominant sentiment of the
primitive Romans was entwined with the relations of the family.
But what was the Family? The Law defined it one way -- natural
affection another. In the conflict between the two,the feeling we
would analyse grew up, taking the form of an enthusiasm for the
institution by which the dictates of affection were permitted to
determine the fortunes of its objects. 
    I regard, therefore, the Roman horror of Intestacy as a
monument of a very early conflict between ancient law and slowly
changing ancient sentiment on the subject of the Family. Some
passages in the Roman Statute-Law, and one statute in particular
which limited the capacity for inheritance possessed by women,
must have contributed to keep alive the feeling; and it is the
general belief that the system of creating Fidei-Commissa, or
bequests in trust, was devised to evade the disabilities imposed
by those statutes. But the feeling itself, in its remarkable
intensity, seems to point back to some deeper antagonism between
law and opinion; nor is it at all wonderful that the improvements
of jurisprudence by the Praetor should not have extinguished it.
Everybody conversant with the philosophy of opinion is aware that
a sentiment by no means dies out, of necessity, with the passing
away of the circumstances which produced it. It may long survive
them; nay, it may afterwards attain to a pitch and climax of
intensity which it never attained during their actual
continuance. 
    The view of a Will which regards it as conferring the power
of diverting property from the Family, or of distributing it in
such uneven proportions as the fancy or good sense of the
Testator may dictate, is not older than that later portion of the
Middle Ages in which Feudalism had completely consolidated
itself. When modern jurisprudence first shows itself in the
rough, Wills are rarely allowed to dispose with absolute freedom
of a dead man's assets. Wherever at this period the descent of
property was regulated by Will -- and over the greater part of
Europe moveable or personal property was the subject of
Testamentary disposition -- the exercise of the Testamentary
power was seldom allowed to interfere with the right of the widow
to a definite share, and of the children to certain fixed
proportions, of the devolving inheritance. The shares of the
children, as their amount shows, were determined by the authority
of Roman law. The provision for the widow was attributable to the
exertions of the Church, which never relaxed its solicitude for
the interest of wives surviving their husbands -- winning,
perhaps, one of the most arduous of its triumphs when, after
exacting for two or three centuries an express promise from the
husband at marriage to endow his wife, it at length succeeded in
engrafting the principle of Dower on the Customary Law of all
Western Europe. Curiously enough, the dower of lands proved a
more stable institution than the analogous and more ancient
reservation of certain shares of the personal property to the
widow and children. A few local customs in France maintained the
right down to the Revolution, and there are traces of similar
usages in England; but on the whole the doctrine prevailed that
moveables might be freely disposed of by Will, and, even when the
claims of the widow continued to be respected, the privileges of
the children were obliterated from jurisprudence. We need not
hesitate to attribute the change to the influence of
Primogeniture. As the Feudal law of land practically disinherited
all the children in favour of one, the equal distribution even of
those sorts of property which might have been equally divided
ceased to be viewed as a duty. Testaments were the principal
instruments employed in producing inequality, and in this
condition of things originated the shade of difference which
shows itself between the ancient and the modern conception of a
Will. But, though the liberty of bequest, enjoyed through
Testaments, was thus an accidental fruit of Feudalism, there is
no broader distinction than that which exists between a system of
free Testamentary disposition and a system, like that of the
Feudal land-law, under which property descends compulsorily in
prescribed lines of devolution. This truth appears to have been
lost sight of by the authors of the French Codes. In the social
fabric which they determined to destroy, they saw Primogeniture
resting chiefly on Family settlements, but they also perceived
that Testaments were frequently employed to give the eldest son
precisely the same preference which was reserved to him under the
strictest of entails. In order, therefore, to make sure of their
work, they not only rendered it impossible to prefer the eldest
son to the rest in marriage-arrangements, but they almost
expelled Testamentary succession from the law, lest it should be
used to defeat their fundamental principle of an equal
distribution of property among children at the parent's death.
The result is that they have established a system of small
perpetual entails, which is infinitely nearer akin to the system
of feudal Europe than would be a perfect liberty of bequest. The
land-law of England, "the Herculaneum of Feudalism," is certainly
much more closely allied to the land-law of the Middle Ages than
that of any Continental country, and Wills with us are frequently
used to aid or imitate that preference of the eldest son and his
line which is a nearly universal feature in marriage settlements
of real property. But nevertheless feeling and opinion in this
country have been profoundly affected by the practice of free
Testamentary disposition; and it appears to me that the state of
sentiment in a great part of French society, on the subject of
the conservation of property in families, is much liker that
which prevailed through Europe two or three centuries ago than
are the current opinions of Englishmen. 
    The mention of Primogeniture introduces one of the most
difficult problems of historical jurisprudence. Though I have not
paused to explain my expressions, it may have been noticed that I
have frequently spoken of a number of "coheirs" as placed by the
Roman Law of Succession on the same footing with a single Heir.
In point of fact, we know of no period of Roman jurisprudence at
which the place of the Heir, or Universal Successor, might not
have been taken by a group of co-heirs. This group succeeded as a
single unit, and the assets were afterwards divided among them in
a separate legal proceeding. When the Succession was ab
intestato, and the group consisted of the children of the
deceased, they each took an equal share of the property; nor,
though males had at one time some advantages over females, is
there the faintest trace of Primogeniture. The mode of
distribution is the same throughout archaic jurisprudence. It
certainly seems that, when civil society begins and families
cease to hold together through a series of generations, the idea
which spontaneously suggests itself is to divide the domain
equally among the members of each successive generation, and to
reserve no privilege to the eldest son or stock. Some peculiarly
significant hints as to the close relation of this phenomenon to
primitive thought are furnished by systems yet more archaic than
the Roman. Among the Hindoos, the instant a son is born, he
acquires a vested right in his father's property, which cannot be
sold without recognition of his joint ownership. On the son 's
attaining full age, he can sometimes compel a partition of the
estate even against the consent of the parent; and, should the
parent acquiesce, one son can always have a partition even
against the will of the others. On such partition taking place,
the father has no advantage over his children, except that he has
two of the shares instead of one. The ancient law of the German
tribes was exceedingly similar. The allod or domain of the family
was the joint-property of the father and his sons. It does not,
however, appear to have been habitually divided even at the death
of the parent, and in the same Way the possessions of a Hindoo,
however divisible theoretically, are so rarely distributed in
fact, that many generations constantly succeed each other without
a partition taking place, and thus the Family in India has a
perpetual tendency to expand into the Village Community, under
conditions which I shall hereafter attempt to elucidate. All this
points very clearly to the absolutely equal division of assets
among the male children at death as the practice most usual with
society at the period when family-dependency is in the first
stages of disintegration. Here then emerges the historical
difficulty of Primogeniture. The more clearly we perceive that,
when the Feudal institutions were in process of formation, there
was no source in the world whence they could derive their
elements but the Roman law of the provincials on the one hand and
the archaic customs of the barbarians on the other, the more are
we perplexed at first sight by our knowledge that neither Roman
nor barbarian was accustomed to give any preference to the eldest
son or his line in the succession to property. 
    Primogeniture did not belong to the Customs which the
barbarians practised on their first establishment within the
Roman Empire. It is known to have had its origin in the benefices
or beneficiary gifts of the invading chieftains. These benefices,
which were occasionally conferred by the earlier immigrant kings,
but were distributed on a great scale by Charlemagne, were grants
of Roman provincial land to be holden by the beneficiary on
condition of military service. The allodial proprietors do not
seem to have followed their sovereign on distant or difficult
enterprises, and all the grander expeditions of the Frankish
chiefs and of Charlemagne were accomplished with forces composed
of soldiers either personally dependent on the royal house or
compelled to serve it by the tenure of their land. The benefices,
however were not at first in any sense hereditary. They were
held, at the pleasure of the grantor, or at most for the life of
the grantee; but still, from the very outset, no effort seems to
have been spared by the beneficiaries to enlarge the tenure, and
to continue their lands in their family after death. Through the
feebleness of Charlemagne's successors these attempts were
universally successful, and the Benefice gradually transformed
itself into the hereditary Fief. But, though the fiefs were
hereditary, they did not necessarily descend to the eldest son.
The rules of succession which they followed were entirely
determined by the terms agreed upon between the grantor and the
beneficiary, or imposed by one of them on the weakness of the
other. The original tenures were therefore extremely various; not
indeed so capriciously variouS as is sometimes asserted, for all
which have hitherto been described present some combination of
the modes of succession familiar to Romans and to barbarians, but
still exceedingly miscellaneous. In some of them, the eldest son
and his stock undoubtedly succeeded to the fief before the
others, but such successions, so far from being universal, do not
even appear to have been general. Precisely the same phenomena
recur during that more recent transmutation of European society
which entirely substituted the feudal form of property for the
domainial (or Roman) and the allodial (or German). The allods
were wholly absorbed by the fiefs. The greater allodial
proprietors transformed themselves into feudal lords by
conditional alienations of portions of their land to dependants;
the smaller sought an escape from the oppressions of that
terrible time by surrendering their property to some powerful
chieftain, and receiving it back at his hands on condition of
service in his wars. Meantime, that vast mass of the population
of Western Europe whose condition was servile or semi-servile --
the Roman and German personal slaves, the Roman coloni and the
German lidi -- were concurrently absorbed by the feudal
organisation, a few of them assuming a menial relation to the
lords, but the greater part receiving land on terms which in
those centuries were considered degrading. The tenures created
during this era of universal infeudation were as various as the
conditions which the tenants made with their new chiefs or were
forced to accept from them. As in the case of the benefices, the
succession to some, but by no means to all, of the estates
followed the rule of Primogeniture. No sooner, however, has the
feudal system prevailed throughout the West, than it becomes
evident that Primogeniture has some great advantage over every
other mode of succession. It spread over Europe with remarkable
rapidity, the principal instrument of diffusion being Family
Settlements, the Pactes de Famille of France and Haus-Gesetze of
Germany, which universally stipulated that lands held by knightly
service should descend to the eldest son. Ultimately the law
resigned itself to follow inveterate practice, and we find that
in all the bodies of Customary Law, which were gradually built
up, the eldest son and stock are preferred in the succession to
estates of which the tenure is free and military. As to lands
held by servile tenures (and originally all tenures were servile
which bound the tenant to pay money or bestow manual labour), the
system of succession prescribed by custom differed greatly in
different countries and different provinces. The more general
rule was that such lands were divided equally at death among all
the children, but still in some instances the eldest son was
preferred, in some the youngest. But Primogeniture usually
governed the inheritance of that class of estates, in some
respects the most important of all, which were held by tenures
that, like the English Socage, were of later origin than the
rest, and were neither altogether free nor altogether servile. 
    The diffusion of Primogeniture is usually accounted for by
assigning what are called Feudal reasons for it. It is asserted
that the feudal superior had a better security for the military
service he required when the fief descended to a single person,
instead of being distributed among a number on the decease of the
last holder. Without denying that this consideration may
partially explain the favour gradually acquired by Primogeniture,
I must point out that Primogeniture became a custom of Europe
much more through its popularity with the tenants than through
any advantage it conferred on the lords. For its origin,
moreover, the reason given does not account at all. Nothing in
law springs entirely from a sense of convenience. There are
always certain ideas existing antecedently on which the sense of
convenience works, and of which it can do no more than form some
new combination; and to find these ideas in the present case is
exactly the problem. 
    A valuable hint is furnished to us from a quarter fruitful of
such indications. Although in India the possessions of a parent
are divisible at his death, and may be divisible during his life,
among all his male children in equal shares, and though this
principle of the equal distribution of property extends to every
part of the Hindoo institutions, yet wherever public office or
political power devolves at the decease of the last Incumbent,
the succession is nearly universally according to the rules of
Primogeniture. Sovereignties descend therefore to the eldest son,
and where the affairs of the Village Community, the corporate
unit of Hindoo society, are confided to a single manager, it is
generally the eldest son who takes up the administration at his
parent's death. All offices, indeed, in India, tend to become
hereditary, and, when their nature permits it, to vest in the
eldest member of the oldest stock. Comparing these Indian
successions with some of the ruder social organisations which
have survived in Europe almost to our own day, the conclusion
suggests itself that, when Patriarchal power is not only domestic
but political, it is not distributed among all the issue at the
parent's death, but is the birthright of the eldest son. The
chieftainship of a Highland clan, for example, followed the order
of Primogeniture. There seems, in truth, to be a form of
family-dependency still more archaic than any of those which we
know from the primitive records of organised civil societies. The
Agnatic Union of the kindred in ancient Roman law, and a
multitude of similar indications, point to a period at which all
the ramifying branches of the family tree held together in one
organic whole; and it is no presumptuous conjecture, that, when
the corporation thus formed by the kindred was in itself an
independent society it was governed by the eldest male of the
oldest line. It is true that we have no actual knowledge of any
such society. Even in the most elementary communities,
family-organisations, as we know them, are at most imperia in
imperio. But the position of some of them, of the Celtic clans in
particular, was sufficiently near independence within historical
times to force on us the conviction that they were once separate
imperia, and that Primogeniture regulated the succession to the
chieftainship. It is, however, necessary to be on our guard
against modern associations with the term of law. We are speaking
of a family-connection still closer and more stringent than any
with which we are made acquainted by Hindoo society or ancient
Roman law. If the Roman Paterfamilias was visibly steward of the
family possessions, if the Hindoo father is only joint-sharer
with his sons, still more emphatically must the true patriarchal
chieftain be merely the administrator of a common fund. 
    The examples of succession by Primogeniture which were found
among the Benefices may, therefore, have been imitated from a
system of family-government known to the invading races, though
not in general use. Some ruder tribes may have still practised
it, or, what is still more probable, society may have been so
slightly removed from its more archaic condition that the minds
of some men spontaneously recurred to it, when they were called
upon to settle the rules of inheritance for a new form of
property, But there is still the question, Why did Primogeniture
gradually supersede every other principle of succession? The
answer, I think, is, that European society decidedly retrograded
during the dissolution of the Carlovingian empire. It sank a
point or two back even from the miserably low degree which it had
marked during the early barbarian monarchies. The great
characteristic of the period was the feebleness, or rather the
abeyance, of kingly and therefore of civil authority,. and hence
it seems as if, civil society no longer cohering, men universally
flung themselves back on a social organisation older than the
beginnings of civil communities. The lord with his vassals,
during the ninth and tenth centuries, may be considered as a
patriarchal household, recruited, not as in the primitive times
by Adoption, but by Infeudation; and to such a confederacy,
succession by Primogeniture was a source of strength and
durability. So long as the land was kept together on which the
entire organisation rested, it was powerful for defence and
attack; to divide the land was to divide the little society, and
voluntarily to invite aggression in an era of universal violence.
We may be perfectly certain that into this preference for
Primogeniture there entered no idea of disinheriting the bulk of
the children in favour of one. Everybody would have suffered by
the division of the fief. Everybody was a gainer by its
consolidation. The Family grew stronger by the concentration of
power in the same hands; nor is it likely that the lord who was
invested with the inheritance had any advantage over his brethren
and kinsfolk in occupations, interests, or indulgences. It would
be a singular anachronism to estimate the privileges succeeded to
by the heir of a fief, by the situation in which the eldest son
is placed under an English strict settlement. 
    I have said that I regard the early feudal confederacies as
descended from an archaic form of the Family, and as wearing a
strong resemblance to it. But then in the ancient world, and in
the societies which have not passed through the crucible of
feudalism, the Primogeniture which seems to have prevailed never
transformed itself into the Primogeniture of the later feudal
Europe. When the group of kinsmen ceased to be governed through a
series of generations by a hereditary chief, the domain which had
been managed for all appears to have been equally divided among
all. Why did this not occur in the feudal world? If during the
confusions of the first feudal period the eldest son held the
land for the behoof of the whole family, why was it that when
feudal Europe had consolidated itself, and regular communities
were again established, the whole family did not resume that
capacity for equal inheritance which had belonged to Roman and
German alike? The key which unlocks this difficulty has rarely
been seized by the writers who occupy themselves in tracing the
genealogy of Feudalism. They perceive the materials of the feudal
institutions, but they miss the cement. The ideas and social
forms which contributed to the formation of the system were
unquestionably barbarian and archaic, but, as soon as Courts and
lawyers were called in to interpret and define it, the principles
of interpretation which they applied to it were those of the
latest Roman jurisprudence, and were therefore excessively
refined and matured. In a patriarchally governed society, the
eldest son may succeed to the government of the Agnatic group,
and to the absolute disposal of its property. But he is not
therefore a true proprietor. He has correlative duties not
involved in the conception of proprietorship, but quite undefined
and quite incapable of definition. The later Roman jurisprudence,
however, like our own law, looked upon uncontrolled power over
property as equivalent to ownership, and did not, and, in fact,
could not, take notice of liabilities of such a kind, that the
very conception of them belonged to a period anterior to regular
law. The contact of the refined and the barbarous notion had
inevitably for its effect the conversion of the eldest son into
legal proprietor of the inheritance. The clerical and secular
lawyers so defined his position from the first; but it was only
by insensible degrees that the younger brother, from
participating on equal terms in all the dangers and enjoyments of
his kinsman, sank into the priest, the soldier of fortune, or the
hanger-on of the mansion. The legal revolution was identical with
that which occurred on a smaller scale, and in quite recent
times, through the greater part of the Highlands of Scotland.
When called in to determine the legal powers of the chieftain
over the domains which gave sustenance to the clan, Scottish
jurisprudence had long since passed the point at which it could
take notice of the vague limitations on completeness of dominion
imposed by the claims of the clansmen, and it was inevitable
therefore that it should convert the patrimony of many into the
estate of one. 
    For the sake of simplicity I have called the mode of
succession Primogeniture whenever a single son or descendant
succeeds to the authority over a household or society. It is
remarkable, however, that in the few very ancient examples which
remain to us of this sort of succession, it is not always the
eldest son, in the sense familiar to us, who takes up the
representation, The form of Primogeniture which has spread over
Western Europe has also been perpetuated among the Hindoos, and
there is every reason to believe that it is the normal form.
Under it, not only the eldest Son, but the eldest line is always
preferred. If the eldest son fails, his eldest son has precedence
not only over brothers but over uncles; and, if he too fails, the
same rule is followed in the next generation. But when the
succession is not merely to civil but to political power, a
difficulty may present itself which will appear of greater
magnitude according as the cohesion of society is less perfect.
The chieftain who last exercised authority may have outlived his
eldest son, and the grandson who is primarily entitled to succeed
may be too young and immature to undertake the actual guidance of
the community, and the administration of its affairs. In such an
event, the expedient which suggests itself to the more settled
societies is to place the infant heir under guardianship till he
reaches the age of fitness for government. The guardianship is
generally that of the male Agnates; but it is remarkable that the
contingency supposed is one of the rare cases in which ancient
societies have consented to the exercise of power by women,
doubtless out of respect to the overshadowing claims of the
mother. In India, the widow of a Hindoo sovereign governs in the
name of her infant son, and we cannot but remember that the
custom regulating succession to the throne of France -- which,
whatever be its origin, is doubtless of the highest antiquity --
preferred the queen-mother to all other claimants for the
Regency, at the same time that it rigorously excluded all females
from the throne. There is, however, another mode of obviating the
inconvenience attending the devolution of sovereignty on an
infant heir, and it is one which would doubtless occur
spontaneously to rudely organised communities. This is to set
aside the infant heir altogether, and confer the chieftainship on
the eldest surviving male of the first generation. The Celtic
clan-associations, among the many phenomena which they have
preserved of an age in which civil and political society were not
yet even rudimentarily separated, have brought down this rule of
succession to historical times. With them, it seems to have
existed in the form of a positive canon, that, failing the eldest
son, his next brother succeeds in priority to all grandsons,
whatever be their age at the moment when the sovereignty
devolves. Some writers have explained the principle by assuming
that the Celtic customs took the last chieftain as a sort of root
or stock, and then gave the succession to the descendant who
should be least remote from him; the uncle thus being preferred
to the grandson as being nearer to the common root. No objection
can be taken to this statement if it be merely intended as a
description of the system of succession; but it would be a
serious error to conceive the men who first adopted the rule as
applying a course of reasoning which evidently dates from the
time when feudal schemes of succession begun to be debated among
lawyers. The true origin of the preference of the uncle to the
grandson is doubtless a simple calculation on the part of rude
men in a rude society that it is better to be governed by a grown
chieftain than by a child, and that the younger son is more
likely to have come to maturity than any of the eldest son's
descendants. At the same time, we have some evidence that the
form of Primogeniture with which we are best acquainted is the
primary form, in the tradition that the assent of the clan was
asked when an infant heir was passed over in favour of his uncle.
There is a tolerably well authenticated instance of this ceremony
in the annals of the Macdonalds. 
    Under Mahometan law which has probably preserved an ancient
Arabian custom, inheritances of property are divided equally
among sons, the daughter taking a half share; but if any of the
children die before the division of the inheritance, leaving
issue behind, these grandchildren are entirely excluded by their
uncles and aunts. Consistently with this principle, the
succession, when political authority devolves, is according to
the form of Primogeniture which appears to have obtained among
the Celtic societies. In the two great Mahometan families of the
West, the rule is believed to be, that the uncle succeeds to the
throne in preference to the nephew, though the latter be the son
of an elder brother; but though this rule has been followed quite
recently in Egypt, I am informed that there is some doubt as to
its governing the devolution of the Turkish sovereignty The
policy of the Sultans has in fact hitherto prevented cases for
its application from occurring, and it is possible that their
wholesale massacres of their younger brothers may have been
perpetuated quite as much in the interest of their children as
for the sake of making away with dangerous competitors for the
throne. It is evident, however, that in polygamous societies the
form of Primogeniture will always tend to vary. Many
considerations may constitute a claim on the succession, the rank
of the mother, for example, or her degree in the affections of
the father. Accordingly, some of the India Mahometa sovereigns,
without pretending to any distinct testamentary power, claim the
right of nominating the son who is to succeed. The blessing
mentioned in the Scriptural history of Isaac and his sons has
sometimes been spoken of as a will, but it seems rather to have
been a mode of naming an eldest son. 

