




CHAPTER XXIX



THE SOCIAL SIDE OF EDISON



THE title of this chapter might imply that there

is an unsocial side to Edison. In a sense this is

true, for no one is more impatient or intolerant of

interruption when deeply engaged in some line of

experiment. Then the caller, no matter how important

or what his mission, is likely to realize his utter

insignificance and be sent away without accomplishing

his object. But, generally speaking, Edison is easy

tolerance itself, with a peculiar weakness toward those

who have the least right to make any demands on his

time. Man is a social animal, and that describes

Edison; but it does not describe accurately the inventor

asking to be let alone.



Edison never sought Society; but "Society" has

never ceased to seek him, and to-day, as ever, the pressure

upon him to give up his work and receive honors,

meet distinguished people, or attend public functions,

is intense. Only two or three years ago, a flattering

invitation came from one of the great English universities

to receive a degree, but at that moment he was

deep in experiments on his new storage battery, and

nothing could budge him. He would not drop the

work, and while highly appreciative of the proposed

honor, let it go by rather than quit for a week or two

the stern drudgery of probing for the fact and the

truth. Whether one approves or not, it is at least

admirable stoicism, of which the world has too little.

A similar instance is that of a visit paid to the laboratory

by some one bringing a gold medal from a foreign

society. It was a very hot day in summer, the visitor

was in full social regalia of silk hat and frock-coat, and

insisted that he could deliver the medal only into

Edison's hands. At that moment Edison, stripped

pretty nearly down to the buff, was at the very crisis

of an important experiment, and refused absolutely

to be interrupted. He had neither sought nor

expected the medal; and if the delegate didn't care to

leave it he could take it away. At last Edison was

overpersuaded, and, all dirty and perspiring as he was,

received the medal rather than cause the visitor to

come again. On one occasion, receiving a medal in

New York, Edison forgot it on the ferry-boat and left

it behind him. A few years ago, when Edison had

received the Albert medal of the Royal Society of

Arts, one of the present authors called at the laboratory

to see it. Nobody knew where it was; hours

passed before it could be found; and when at last the

accompanying letter was produced, it had an office

date stamp right over the signature of the royal president.

A visitor to the laboratory with one of these

medallic awards asked Edison if he had any others.

"Oh yes," he said, "I have a couple of quarts more

up at the house!" All this sounds like lack of

appreciation, but it is anything else than that. While in

Paris, in 1889, he wore the decoration of the Legion of

Honor whenever occasion required, but at all other

times turned the badge under his lapel "because he

hated to have fellow-Americans think he was showing

off." And any one who knows Edison will bear testimony

to his utter absence of ostentation. It may be

added that, in addition to the two quarts of medals

up at the house, there will be found at Glenmont

many other signal tokens of esteem and good-will--a

beautiful cigar-case from the late Tsar of Russia,

bronzes from the Government of Japan, steel trophies

from Krupp, and a host of other mementos, to one of

which he thus refers: "When the experiments with

the light were going on at Menlo Park, Sarah

Bernhardt came to America. One evening, Robert L.

Cutting, of New York, brought her out to see the light.

She was a terrific `rubberneck.' She jumped all over

the machinery, and I had one man especially to guard

her dress. She wanted to know everything. She

would speak in French, and Cutting would translate

into English. She stayed there about an hour and a

half. Bernhardt gave me two pictures, painted by

herself, which she sent me from Paris."



Reference has already been made to the callers upon

Edison; and to give simply the names of persons of

distinction would fill many pages of this record. Some

were mere consumers of time; others were gladly

welcomed, like Lord Kelvin, the greatest physicist of

the last century, with whom Edison was always in

friendly communication. "The first time I saw Lord

Kelvin, he came to my laboratory at Menlo Park in

1876." (He reported most favorably on Edison's

automatic telegraph system at the Philadelphia

Exposition of 1876.) "I was then experimenting with

sending eight messages simultaneously over a wire by

means of synchronizing tuning-forks. I would take a

wire with similar apparatus at both ends, and would

throw it over on one set of instruments, take it away,

and get it back so quickly that you would not miss it,

thereby taking advantage of the rapidity of electricity

to perform operations. On my local wire I got it to

work very nicely. When Sir William Thomson (Kelvin)

came in the room, he was introduced to me, and

had a number of friends with him. He said: `What

have you here?' I told him briefly what it was. He

then turned around, and to my great surprise explained

the whole thing to his friends. Quite a different

exhibition was given two weeks later by another

well-known Englishman, also an electrician, who came

in with his friends, and I was trying for two hours to

explain it to him and failed."



After the introduction of the electric light, Edison

was more than ever in demand socially, but he shunned

functions like the plague, not only because of the

serious interference with work, but because of his deafness.

Some dinners he had to attend, but a man who

ate little and heard less could derive practically no

pleasure from them. "George Washington Childs was

very anxious I should go down to Philadelphia to dine

with him. I seldom went to dinners. He insisted I

should go--that a special car would leave New York.

It was for me to meet Mr. Joseph Chamberlain. We

had the private car of Mr. Roberts, President of the

Pennsylvania Railroad. We had one of those celebrated

dinners that only Mr. Childs could give, and

I heard speeches from Charles Francis Adams and dif-

ferent people. When I came back to the depot, Mr.

Roberts was there, and insisted on carrying my satchel

for me. I never could understand that."



Among the more distinguished visitors of the electric-

lighting period was President Diaz, with whom

Edison became quite intimate. "President Diaz, of

Mexico, visited this country with Mrs. Diaz, a highly

educated and beautiful woman. She spoke very good

English. They both took a deep interest in all they

saw. I don't know how it ever came about, as it is

not in my line, but I seemed to be delegated to show

them around. I took them to railroad buildings,

electric-light plants, fire departments, and showed

them a great variety of things. It lasted two days."

Of another visit Edison says: "Sitting Bull and fifteen

Sioux Indians came to Washington to see the

Great Father, and then to New York, and went to the

Goerck Street works. We could make some very

good pyrotechnics there, so we determined to give the

Indians a scare. But it didn't work. We had an arc

there of a most terrifying character, but they never

moved a muscle." Another episode at Goerck Street

did not find the visitors quite so stoical. "In testing

dynamos at Goerck Street we had a long flat belt running

parallel with the floor, about four inches above

it, and travelling four thousand feet a minute. One

day one of the directors brought in three or four ladies

to the works to see the new electric-light system. One

of the ladies had a little poodle led by a string. The

belt was running so smoothly and evenly, the poodle

did not notice the difference between it and the floor,

and got into the belt before we could do anything.

The dog was whirled around forty or fifty times, and

a little flat piece of leather came out--and the ladies

fainted."



A very interesting period, on the social side, was the

visit paid by Edison and his family to Europe in 1889,

when he had made a splendid exhibit of his inventions

and apparatus at the great Paris Centennial Exposition

of that year, to the extreme delight of the French,

who welcomed him with open arms. The political

sentiments that the Exposition celebrated were not

such as to find general sympathy in monarchical

Europe, so that the "crowned heads" were conspicuous

by their absence. It was not, of course, by

way of theatrical antithesis that Edison appeared in

Paris at such a time. But the contrast was none the

less striking and effective. It was felt that, after all,

that which the great exposition exemplified at its best

--the triumph of genius over matter, over ignorance,

over superstition--met with its due recognition when

Edison came to participate, and to felicitate a noble

nation that could show so much in the victories of

civilization and the arts, despite its long trials and

its long struggle for liberty. It is no exaggeration to

say that Edison was greeted with the enthusiastic

homage of the whole French people. They could find

no praise warm enough for the man who had "organized

the echoes" and "tamed the lightning," and

whose career was so picturesque with eventful and

romantic development. In fact, for weeks together

it seemed as though no Parisian paper was considered

complete and up to date without an article on Edison.

The exuberant wit and fancy of the feuilletonists

seized upon his various inventions evolving from

them others of the most extraordinary nature with

which to bedazzle and bewilder the reader. At the

close of the Exposition Edison was created a Commander

of the Legion of Honor. His own exhibit,

made at a personal expense of over $100,000, covered

several thousand square feet in the vast Machinery

Hall, and was centred around a huge Edison lamp

built of myriads of smaller lamps of the ordinary size.

The great attraction, however, was the display of

the perfected phonograph. Several instruments were

provided, and every day, all day long, while the Exposition

lasted, queues of eager visitors from every

quarter of the globe were waiting to hear the little

machine talk and sing and reproduce their own voices.

Never before was such a collection of the languages

of the world made. It was the first linguistic

concourse since Babel times. We must let Edison tell

the story of some of his experiences:



"At the Universal Exposition at Paris, in 1889, I

made a personal exhibit covering about an acre. As

I had no intention of offering to sell anything I was

showing, and was pushing no companies, the whole

exhibition was made for honor, and without any hope

of profit. But the Paris newspapers came around and

wanted pay for notices of it, which we promptly refused;

whereupon there was rather a stormy time for

a while, but nothing was published about it.



"While at the Exposition I visited the Opera-House.

The President of France lent me his private box. The

Opera-House was one of the first to be lighted by

the incandescent lamp, and the managers took great

pleasure in showing me down through the labyrinth

containing the wiring, dynamos, etc. When I came

into the box, the orchestra played the `Star-Spangled

Banner,' and all the people in the house arose; whereupon

I was very much embarrassed. After I had been

an hour at the play, the manager came around and

asked me to go underneath the stage, as they were

putting on a ballet of 300 girls, the finest ballet in

Europe. It seems there is a little hole on the stage

with a hood over it, in which the prompter sits when

opera is given. In this instance it was not occupied,

and I was given the position in the prompter's seat,

and saw the whole ballet at close range.



"The city of Paris gave me a dinner at the new

Hotel de Ville, which was also lighted with the Edison

system. They had a very fine installation of machinery.

As I could not understand or speak a word

of French, I went to see our minister, Mr. Whitelaw

Reid, and got him to send a deputy to answer for me,

which he did, with my grateful thanks. Then the

telephone company gave me a dinner, and the engineers

of France; and I attended the dinner celebrating

the fiftieth anniversary of the discovery of photography.

Then they sent to Reid my decoration, and

they tried to put a sash on me, but I could not stand

for that. My wife had me wear the little red button,

but when I saw Americans coming I would slip it out

of my lapel, as I thought they would jolly me for wearing

it."



Nor was this all. Edison naturally met many of

the celebrities of France: "I visited the Eiffel Tower

at the invitation of Eiffel. We went to the top, where

there was an extension and a small place in which

was Eiffel's private office. In this was a piano.

When my wife and I arrived at the top, we found that

Gounod, the composer, was there. We stayed a

couple of hours, and Gounod sang and played for us.

We spent a day at Meudon, an old palace given by the

government to Jansen, the astronomer. He occupied

three rooms, and there were 300. He had the grand

dining-room for his laboratory. He showed me a

gyroscope he had got up which made the incredible

number of 4000 revolutions in a second. A modification

of this was afterward used on the French Atlantic

lines for making an artificial horizon to take

observations for position at sea. In connection with

this a gentleman came to me a number of years afterward,

and I got out a part of some plans for him. He

wanted to make a gigantic gyroscope weighing several

tons, to be run by an electric motor and put on a sailing

ship. He wanted this gyroscope to keep a platform

perfectly horizontal, no matter how rough the sea was.

Upon this platform he was going to mount a telescope

to observe an eclipse off the Gold Coast of Africa. But

for some reason it was never completed.



"Pasteur invited me to come down to the Institute,

and I went and had quite a chat with him. I saw

a large number of persons being inoculated, and also

the whole modus operandi, which was very interesting.

I saw one beautiful boy about ten, the son of

an English lord. His father was with him. He had

been bitten in the face, and was taking the treatment.

I said to Pasteur, `Will he live?' `No,' said he, `the

boy will be dead in six days. He was bitten too

near the top of the spinal column, and came too

late!' "



Edison has no opinion to offer as an expert on art,

but has his own standard of taste: "Of course I

visited the Louvre and saw the Old Masters, which I

could not enjoy. And I attended the Luxembourg,

with modern masters, which I enjoyed greatly. To

my mind, the Old Masters are not art, and I suspect

that many others are of the same opinion; and that

their value is in their scarcity and in the variety of

men with lots of money." Somewhat akin to this is

a shrewd comment on one feature of the Exposition:

"I spent several days in the Exposition at Paris. I

remember going to the exhibit of the Kimberley diamond

mines, and they kindly permitted me to take

diamonds from some of the blue earth which they

were washing by machinery to exhibit the mine operations.

I found several beautiful diamonds, but they

seemed a little light weight to me when I was picking

them out. They were diamonds for exhibition purposes

--probably glass."



This did not altogether complete the European trip

of 1889, for Edison wished to see Helmholtz. "After

leaving Paris we went to Berlin. The French papers

then came out and attacked me because I went to

Germany; and said I was now going over to the enemy.

I visited all the things of interest in Berlin; and then

on my way home I went with Helmholtz and Siemens

in a private compartment to the meeting of the German

Association of Science at Heidelberg, and spent

two days there. When I started from Berlin on the

trip, I began to tell American stories. Siemens was

very fond of these stories and would laugh immensely

at them, and could see the points and the humor, by

his imagination; but Helmholtz could not see one of

them. Siemens would quickly, in German, explain

the point, but Helmholtz could not see it, although he

understood English, which Siemens could speak. Still

the explanations were made in German. I always

wished I could have understood Siemens's explanations

of the points of those stories. At Heidelberg, my

assistant, Mr. Wangemann, an accomplished German-

American, showed the phonograph before the Association."



Then came the trip from the Continent to England,

of which this will certainly pass as a graphic picture:

"When I crossed over to England I had heard a good

deal about the terrors of the English Channel as regards

seasickness. I had been over the ocean three

times and did not know what seasickness was, so far

as I was concerned myself. I was told that while a

man might not get seasick on the ocean, if he met a

good storm on the Channel it would do for him.

When we arrived at Calais to cross over, everybody

made for the restaurant. I did not care about eating,

and did not go to the restaurant, but my family did.

I walked out and tried to find the boat. Going along

the dock I saw two small smokestacks sticking up,

and looking down saw a little boat. `Where is the

steamer that goes across the Channel?' `This is the

boat.' There had been a storm in the North Sea that

had carried away some of the boats on the German

steamer, and it certainly looked awful tough outside.

I said to the man: `Will that boat live in that sea?'

`Oh yes,' he said, `but we've had a bad storm.' So I

made up my mind that perhaps I would get sick this

time. The managing director of the English railroad

owning this line was Forbes, who heard I was coming

over, and placed the private saloon at my disposal.

The moment my family got in the room with the

French lady's maid and the rest, they commenced to

get sick, so I felt pretty sure I was in for it. We

started out of the little inlet and got into the Channel,

and that boat went in seventeen directions simultaneously.

I waited awhile to see what was going to

occur, and then went into the smoking-compartment.

Nobody was there. By-and-by the fun began.

Sounds of all kinds and varieties were heard in every

direction. They were all sick. There must have

been 100 people aboard. I didn't see a single exception

except the waiters and myself. I asked one of

the waiters concerning the boat itself, and was taken

to see the engineer, and went down to look at the

engines, and saw the captain. But I kept mostly in

the smoking-room. I was smoking a big cigar, and

when a man looked in I would give a big puff, and

every time they saw that they would go away and

begin again. The English Channel is a holy terror,

all right, but it didn't affect me. I must be out of

balance."



While in Paris, Edison had met Sir John Pender,

the English "cable king," and had received an invitation

from him to make a visit to his country residence:

"Sir John Pender, the master of the cable system of

the world at that time, I met in Paris. I think he

must have lived among a lot of people who were very

solemn, because I went out riding with him in the Bois

de Boulogne and started in to tell him American

stories. Although he was a Scotchman he laughed

immoderately. He had the faculty of understanding

and quickly seeing the point of the stories; and for

three days after I could not get rid of him. Finally

I made him a promise that I would go to his country

house at Foot's Cray, near London. So I went there,

and spent two or three days telling him stories.



"While at Foot's Cray, I met some of the backers

of Ferranti, then putting up a gigantic alternating-

current dynamo near London to send ten or fifteen

thousand volts up into the main district of the city for

electric lighting. I think Pender was interested. At

any rate the people invited to dinner were very much

interested, and they questioned me as to what I

thought of the proposition. I said I hadn't any

thought about it, and could not give any opinion

until I saw it. So I was taken up to London to see

the dynamo in course of construction and the methods

employed; and they insisted I should give them some

expression of my views. While I gave them my

opinion, it was reluctantly; I did not want to do so.

I thought that commercially the thing was too ambitious,

that Ferranti's ideas were too big, just then;

that he ought to have started a little smaller until he

was sure. I understand that this installation was not

commercially successful, as there were a great many

troubles. But Ferranti had good ideas, and he was

no small man."



Incidentally it may be noted here that during the

same year (1889) the various manufacturing Edison

lighting interests in America were brought together,

under the leadership of Mr. Henry Villard, and

consolidated in the Edison General Electric Company

with a capital of no less than $12,000,000 on an eight-

per-cent.-dividend basis. The numerous Edison central

stations all over the country represented much

more than that sum, and made a splendid outlet for

the product of the factories. A few years later came

the consolidation with the Thomson-Houston interests

in the General Electric Company, which under the

brilliant and vigorous management of President C. A.

Coffin has become one of the greatest manufacturing

institutions of the country, with an output of apparatus

reaching toward $75,000,000 annually. The net result

of both financial operations was, however, to

detach Edison from the special field of invention to

which he had given so many of his most fruitful years;

and to close very definitely that chapter of his life,

leaving him free to develop other ideas and interests

as set forth in these volumes.



It might appear strange on the surface, but one of

the reasons that most influenced Edison to regrets in

connection with the "big trade" of 1889 was that it

separated him from his old friend and ally, Bergmann,

who, on selling out, saw a great future for himself in

Germany, went there, and realized it. Edison has

always had an amused admiration for Bergmann, and

his "social side" is often made evident by his love of

telling stories about those days of struggle. Some of

the stories were told for this volume. "Bergmann

came to work for me as a boy," says Edison. "He

started in on stock-quotation printers. As he was a

rapid workman and paid no attention to the clock, I

took a fancy to him, and gave him piece-work. He

contrived so many little tools to cheapen the work

that he made lots of money. I even helped him get

up tools until it occurred to me that this was too rapid

a process of getting rid of my money, as I hadn't the

heart to cut the price when it was originally fair.

After a year or so, Bergmann got enough money to

start a small shop in Wooster Street, New York, and

it was at this shop that the first phonographs were

made for sale. Then came the carbon telephone

transmitter, a large number of which were made by

Bergmann for the Western Union. Finally came the

electric light. A dynamo was installed in Bergmann's

shop to permit him to test the various small devices

which he was then making for the system. He rented

power from a Jew who owned the building. Power

was supplied from a fifty-horse-power engine to

other tenants on the several floors. Soon after the

introduction of the big dynamo machine, the landlord

appeared in the shop and insisted that Bergmann was

using more power than he was paying for, and said

that lately the belt on the engine was slipping and

squealing. Bergmann maintained that he must be

mistaken. The landlord kept going among his

tenants and finally discovered the dynamo. `Oh! Mr.

Bergmann, now I know where my power goes to,'

pointing to the dynamo. Bergmann gave him a

withering look of scorn, and said, `Come here and I

will show you.' Throwing off the belt and disconnecting

the wires, he spun the armature around by hand.

`There,' said Bergmann, `you see it's not here that

you must look for your loss.' This satisfied the landlord,

and he started off to his other tenants. He did

not know that that machine, when the wires were

connected, could stop his engine.



"Soon after, the business had grown so large that

E. H. Johnson and I went in as partners, and Bergmann

rented an immense factory building at the

corner of Avenue B and East Seventeenth Street,

New York, six stories high and covering a quarter of

a block. Here were made all the small things used on

the electric-lighting system, such as sockets, chandeliers,

switches, meters, etc. In addition, stock tickers,

telephones, telephone switchboards, and typewriters

were made the Hammond typewriters were perfected

and made there. Over 1500 men were finally

employed. This shop was very successful both

scientifically and financially. Bergmann was a man of


great executive ability and carried economy of

manufacture to the limit. Among all the men I have had

associated with me, he had the commercial instinct

most highly developed."



One need not wonder at Edison's reminiscent remark

that, "In any trade any of my `boys' made with

Bergmann he always got the best of them, no matter

what it was. One time there was to be a convention

of the managers of Edison illuminating companies at

Chicago. There were a lot of representatives from

the East, and a private car was hired. At Jersey City

a poker game was started by one of the delegates.

Bergmann was induced to enter the game. This was

played right through to Chicago without any sleep,

but the boys didn't mind that. I had gotten them

immune to it. Bergmann had won all the money, and

when the porter came in and said `Chicago,' Bergmann

jumped up and said: `What! Chicago! I thought it

was only Philadelphia!' "



But perhaps this further story is a better indication

of developed humor and shrewdness: "A man by the

name of Epstein had been in the habit of buying brass

chips and trimmings from the lathes, and in some way

Bergmann found out that he had been cheated. This

hurt his pride, and he determined to get even. One

day Epstein appeared and said: `Good-morning, Mr.

Bergmann, have you any chips to-day?' `No,' said

Bergmann, `I have none.' `That's strange, Mr.

Bergmann; won't you look?' No, he wouldn't look;

he knew he had none. Finally Epstein was so persistent

that Bergmann called an assistant and told

him to go and see if he had any chips. He returned

and said they had the largest and finest lot they ever

had. Epstein went up to several boxes piled full of

chips, and so heavy that he could not lift even one end

of a box. `Now, Mr. Bergmann,' said Epstein, `how

much for the lot?' `Epstein,' said Bergmann, `you

have cheated me, and I will no longer sell by the lot,

but will sell only by the pound.' No amount of argument

would apparently change Bergmann's determination

to sell by the pound, but finally Epstein got up

to $250 for the lot, and Bergmann, appearing as if

disgusted, accepted and made him count out the

money. Then he said: `Well, Epstein, good-bye,

I've got to go down to Wall Street.' Epstein and his

assistant then attempted to lift the boxes to carry

them out, but couldn't; and then discovered that cal-

culations as to quantity had been thrown out because

the boxes had all been screwed down to the floor and

mostly filled with boards with a veneer of brass chips.

He made such a scene that he had to be removed by

the police. I met him several days afterward and he

said he had forgiven Mr. Bergmann, as he was such a

smart business man, and the scheme was so ingenious.



"One day as a joke I filled three or four sheets of

foolscap paper with a jumble of figures and told

Bergmann they were calculations showing the great

loss of power from blowing the factory whistle.

Bergmann thought it real, and never after that would

he permit the whistle to blow."



Another glimpse of the "social side" is afforded in

the following little series of pen-pictures of the same

place and time: "I had my laboratory at the top of

the Bergmann works, after moving from Menlo Park.

The building was six stories high. My father came

there when he was eighty years of age. The old man

had powerful lungs. In fact, when I was examined

by the Mutual Life Insurance Company, in 1873, my

lung expansion was taken by the doctor, and the old

gentleman was there at the time. He said to the

doctor: `I wish you would take my lung expansion,

too.' The doctor took it, and his surprise was very

great, as it was one of the largest on record. I think

it was five and one-half inches. There were only

three or four could beat it. Little Bergmann hadn't

much lung power. The old man said to him, one day:

`Let's run up-stairs.' Bergmann agreed and ran up.

When they got there Bergmann was all done up, but

my father never showed a sign of it. There was an

elevator there, and each day while it was travelling up

I held the stem of my Waterbury watch up against

the column in the elevator shaft and it finished the

winding by the time I got up the six stories." This

original method of reducing the amount of physical

labor involved in watch-winding brings to mind another

instance of shrewdness mentioned by Edison,

with regard to his newsboy days. Being asked whether

he did not get imposed upon with bad bank-bills, he

replied that he subscribed to a bank-note detector and

consulted it closely whenever a note of any size fell

into his hands. He was then less than fourteen

years old.



The conversations with Edison that elicited these

stories brought out some details as to peril that

attends experimentation. He has confronted many a

serious physical risk, and counts himself lucky to have

come through without a scratch or scar. Four

instances of personal danger may be noted in his own

language: "When I started at Menlo, I had an electric

furnace for welding rare metals that I did not

know about very clearly. I was in the dark-room,

where I had a lot of chloride of sulphur, a very corrosive

liquid. I did not know that it would decompose

by water. I poured in a beakerful of water, and the

whole thing exploded and threw a lot of it into my

eyes. I ran to the hydrant, leaned over backward,

opened my eyes, and ran the hydrant water right

into them. But it was two weeks before I could see.



"The next time we just saved ourselves. I was

making some stuff to squirt into filaments for the

incandescent lamp. I made about a pound of it. I

had used ammonia and bromine. I did not know it

at the time, but I had made bromide of nitrogen. I

put the large bulk of it in three filters, and after it had

been washed and all the water had come through the

filter, I opened the three filters and laid them on a hot

steam plate to dry with the stuff. While I and Mr.

Sadler, one of my assistants, were working near it,

there was a sudden flash of light, and a very smart

explosion. I said to Sadler: `What is that?' `I

don't know,' he said, and we paid no attention. In

about half a minute there was a sharp concussion,

and Sadler said: `See, it is that stuff on the steam

plate.' I grabbed the whole thing and threw it in the

sink, and poured water on it. I saved a little of it

and found it was a terrific explosive. The reason why

those little preliminary explosions took place was that

a little had spattered out on the edge of the filter paper,

and had dried first and exploded. Had the main body

exploded there would have been nothing left of the

laboratory I was working in.



"At another time, I had a briquetting machine for

briquetting iron ore. I had a lever held down by a

powerful spring, and a rod one inch in diameter and

four feet long. While I was experimenting with it,

and standing beside it, a washer broke, and that

spring threw the rod right up to the ceiling with a

blast; and it came down again just within an inch

of my nose, and went clear through a two-inch

plank. That was `within an inch of your life,' as

they say.



"In my experimental plant for concentrating iron

ore in the northern part of New Jersey, we had a verti-

cal drier, a column about nine feet square and eighty

feet high. At the bottom there was a space where

two men could go through a hole; and then all the rest

of the column was filled with baffle plates. One day

this drier got blocked, and the ore would not run

down. So I and the vice-president of the company,

Mr. Mallory, crowded through the manhole to see why

the ore would not come down. After we got in, the

ore did come down and there were fourteen tons of it

above us. The men outside knew we were in there,

and they had a great time digging us out and getting

air to us."



Such incidents brought out in narration the fact

that many of the men working with him had been less

fortunate, particularly those who had experimented

with the Roentgen X-ray, whose ravages, like those of

leprosy, were responsible for the mutilation and death

of at least one expert assistant. In the early days of

work on the incandescent lamp, also, there was

considerable trouble with mercury. "I had a series of

vacuum-pumps worked by mercury and used for exhausting

experimental incandescent lamps. The main

pipe, which was full of mercury, was about seven and

one-half feet from the floor. Along the length of the

pipe were outlets to which thick rubber tubing was

connected, each tube to a pump. One day, while

experimenting with the mercury pump, my assistant,

an awkward country lad from a farm on Staten Island,

who had adenoids in his nose and breathed through

his mouth, which was always wide open, was looking

up at this pipe, at a small leak of mercury, when the

rubber tube came off and probably two pounds of

mercury went into his mouth and down his throat,

and got through his system somehow. In a short

time he became salivated, and his teeth got loose.

He went home, and shortly his mother appeared at

the laboratory with a horsewhip, which she proposed

to use on the proprietor. I was fortunately absent,

and she was mollified somehow by my other assistants.

I had given the boy considerable iodide of potassium

to prevent salivation, but it did no good in this case.



"When the first lamp-works were started at Menlo

Park, one of my experiments seemed to show that hot

mercury gave a better vacuum in the lamp than cold

mercury. I thereupon started to heat it. Soon all

the men got salivated, and things looked serious; but

I found that in the mirror factories, where mercury

was used extensively, the French Government made

the giving of iodide of potassium compulsory to prevent

salivation. I carried out this idea, and made

every man take a dose every day, but there was great

opposition, and hot mercury was finally abandoned."



It will have been gathered that Edison has owed his

special immunity from "occupational diseases" not

only to luck but to unusual powers of endurance, and

a strong physique, inherited, no doubt, from his father.

Mr. Mallory mentions a little fact that bears on this

exceptional quality of bodily powers. "I have often

been surprised at Edison's wonderful capacity for the

instant visual perception of differences in materials

that were invisible to others until he would patiently

point them out. This had puzzled me for years, but

one day I was unexpectedly let into part of the secret.

For some little time past Mr. Edison had noticed that

he was bothered somewhat in reading print, and I

asked him to have an oculist give him reading-glasses.

He partially promised, but never took time to attend

to it. One day he and I were in the city, and as Mrs.

Edison had spoken to me about it, and as we happened

to have an hour to spare, I persuaded him to go to

an oculist with me. Using no names, I asked the latter

to examine the gentleman's eyes. He did so very

conscientiously, and it was an interesting experience,

for he was kept busy answering Mr. Edison's numerous

questions. When the oculist finished, he turned to

me and said: "I have been many years in the business,

but have never seen an optic nerve like that of

this gentleman. An ordinary optic nerve is about

the thickness of a thread, but his is like a cord. He

must be a remarkable man in some walk of life.

Who is he?"



It has certainly required great bodily vigor and

physical capacity to sustain such fatigue as Edison

has all his life imposed upon himself, to the extent on

one occasion of going five days without sleep. In a

conversation during 1909, he remarked, as though it

were nothing out of the way, that up to seven years

previously his average of daily working hours was

nineteen and one-half, but that since then he figured

it at eighteen. He said he stood it easily, because he

was interested in everything, and was reading and

studying all the time. For instance, he had gone to

bed the night before exactly at twelve and had arisen

at 4.30 A. M. to read some New York law reports. It

was suggested that the secret of it might be that he

did not live in the past, but was always looking for-

ward to a greater future, to which he replied: "Yes,

that's it. I don't live with the past; I am living for

to-day and to-morrow. I am interested in every

department of science, arts, and manufacture. I read

all the time on astronomy, chemistry, biology, physics,

music, metaphysics, mechanics, and other branches--

political economy, electricity, and, in fact, all things

that are making for progress in the world. I get all

the proceedings of the scientific societies, the principal

scientific and trade journals, and read them. I also

read The Clipper, The Police Gazette, The Billboard,

The Dramatic Mirror, and a lot of similar publications,

for I like to know what is going on. In this way I

keep up to date, and live in a great moving world of

my own, and, what's more, I enjoy every minute of it."

Referring to some event of the past, he said: "Spilt

milk doesn't interest me. I have spilt lots of it, and

while I have always felt it for a few days, it is quickly

forgotten, and I turn again to the future." During

another talk on kindred affairs it was suggested to

Edison that, as he had worked so hard all his life, it

was about time for him to think somewhat of the

pleasures of travel and the social side of life. To

which he replied laughingly: "I already have a schedule

worked out. From now until I am seventy-five

years of age, I expect to keep more or less busy with

my regular work, not, however, working as many

hours or as hard as I have in the past. At seventy

five I expect to wear loud waistcoats with fancy

buttons; also gaiter tops; at eighty I expect to learn how

to play bridge whist and talk foolishly to the ladies.

At eighty-five I expect to wear a full-dress suit every

evening at dinner, and at ninety--well, I never plan

more than thirty years ahead."



The reference to clothes is interesting, as it is one

of the few subjects in which Edison has no interest.

It rather bores him. His dress is always of the plainest;

in fact, so plain that, at the Bergmann shops in

New York, the children attending a parochial Catholic

school were wont to salute him with the finger to the

head, every time he went by. Upon inquiring, he

found that they took him for a priest, with his dark

garb, smooth-shaven face, and serious expression.

Edison says: "I get a suit that fits me; then I compel

the tailors to use that as a jig or pattern or blue-print

to make others by. For many years a suit was used

as a measurement; once or twice they took fresh

measurements, but these didn't fit and they had to

go back. I eat to keep my weight constant, hence I

need never change measurements." In regard to

this, Mr. Mallory furnishes a bit of chat as follows:

"In a lawsuit in which I was a witness, I went out to

lunch with the lawyers on both sides, and the lawyer

who had been cross-examining me stated that he had

for a client a Fifth Avenue tailor, who had told him

that he had made all of Mr. Edison's clothes for the

last twenty years, and that he had never seen him.

He said that some twenty years ago a suit was sent

to him from Orange, and measurements were made

from it, and that every suit since had been made from

these measurements. I may add, from my own personal

observation, that in Mr. Edison's clothes there is

no evidence but that every new suit that he has worn

in that time looks as if he had been specially measured

for it, which shows how very little he has changed

physically in the last twenty years."



Edison has never had any taste for amusements,

although he will indulge in the game of "Parchesi"

and has a billiard-table in his house. The coming of

the automobile was a great boon to him, because it

gave him a form of outdoor sport in which he could

indulge in a spirit of observation, without the guilty

feeling that he was wasting valuable time. In his

automobile he has made long tours, and with his

family has particularly indulged his taste for botany.

That he has had the usual experience in running

machines will be evidenced by the following little

story from Mr. Mallory: "About three years ago I

had a motor-car of a make of which Mr. Edison had

already two cars; and when the car was received I made

inquiry as to whether any repair parts were carried

by any of the various garages in Easton, Pennsylvania,

near our cement works. I learned that this particular

car was the only one in Easton. Knowing that Mr.

Edison had had an experience lasting two or three

years with this particular make of car, I determined

to ask him for information relative to repair parts; so

the next time I was at the laboratory I told him I

was unable to get any repair parts in Easton, and that

I wished to order some of the most necessary, so that,

in case of breakdowns, I would not be compelled to

lose the use of the car for several days until the parts

came from the automobile factory. I asked his advice

as to what I should order, to which he replied:

`I don't think it will be necessary to order an extra

top.' " Since that episode, which will probably be

appreciated by most automobilists, Edison has taken

up the electric automobile, and is now using it as well

as developing it. One of the cars equipped with his

battery is the Bailey, and Mr. Bee tells the following

story in regard to it: "One day Colonel Bailey, of

Amesbury, Massachusetts, who was visiting the Automobile

Show in New York, came out to the laboratory

to see Mr. Edison, as the latter had expressed a desire

to talk with him on his next visit to the metropolis.

When he arrived at the laboratory, Mr. Edison, who

had been up all night experimenting, was asleep on the

cot in the library. As a rule we never wake Mr. Edison

from sleep, but as he wanted to see Colonel Bailey, who

had to go, I felt that an exception should be made, so

I went and tapped him on the shoulder. He awoke

at once, smiling, jumped up, was instantly himself as

usual, and advanced and greeted the visitor. His

very first question was: `Well, Colonel, how did you

come out on that experiment?'--referring to some

suggestions he had made at their last meeting a year

before. For a minute Colonel Bailey did not recall

what was referred to; but a few words from Mr. Edison

brought it back to his remembrance, and he reported

that the results had justified Mr. Edison's expectations."



It might be expected that Edison would have extreme

and even radical ideas on the subject of education--and

he has, as well as a perfect readiness to

express them, because he considers that time is wasted

on things that are not essential: "What we need,"

he has said, "are men capable of doing work. I

wouldn't give a penny for the ordinary college grad-

uate, except those from the institutes of technology.

Those coming up from the ranks are a darned sight

better than the others. They aren't filled up with

Latin, philosophy, and the rest of that ninny stuff."

A further remark of his is: "What the country needs

now is the practical skilled engineer, who is capable

of doing everything. In three or four centuries, when

the country is settled, and commercialism is diminished,

there will be time for the literary men. At

present we want engineers, industrial men, good

business-like managers, and railroad men." It is

hardly to be marvelled at that such views should

elicit warm protest, summed up in the comment:

"Mr. Edison and many like him see in reverse the

course of human progress. Invention does not

smooth the way for the practical men and make them

possible. There is always too much danger of neglecting

thoughts for things, ideas for machinery. No

theory of education that aggravates this danger is

consistent with national well-being."



Edison is slow to discuss the great mysteries of life,

but is of reverential attitude of mind, and ever tolerant

of others' beliefs. He is not a religious man in the

sense of turning to forms and creeds, but, as might be

expected, is inclined as an inventor and creator to

argue from the basis of "design" and thence to infer

a designer. "After years of watching the processes

of nature," he says, "I can no more doubt the existence

of an Intelligence that is running things than I

do of the existence of myself. Take, for example, the

substance water that forms the crystals known as ice.

Now, there are hundreds of combinations that form

crystals, and every one of them, save ice, sinks in

water. Ice, I say, doesn't, and it is rather lucky for

us mortals, for if it had done so, we would all be

dead. Why? Simply because if ice sank to the bottoms

of rivers, lakes, and oceans as fast as it froze,

those places would be frozen up and there would be

no water left. That is only one example out of thousands

that to me prove beyond the possibility of a

doubt that some vast Intelligence is governing this

and other planets."



A few words as to the domestic and personal side

of Edison's life, to which many incidental references

have already been made in these pages. He was

married in 1873 to Miss Mary Stillwell, who died in

1884, leaving three children--Thomas Alva, William

Leslie, and Marion Estelle.



Mr. Edison was married again in 1886 to Miss

Mina Miller, daughter of Mr. Lewis Miller, a distinguished

pioneer inventor and manufacturer in the

field of agricultural machinery, and equally entitled

to fame as the father of the "Chautauqua idea," and

the founder with Bishop Vincent of the original Chautauqua,

which now has so many replicas all over the

country, and which started in motion one of the

great modern educational and moral forces in America.

By this marriage there are three children--Charles,

Madeline, and Theodore.



For over a score of years, dating from his marriage

to Miss Miller, Edison's happy and perfect domestic

life has been spent at Glenmont, a beautiful property

acquired at that time in Llewellyn Park, on the higher

slopes of Orange Mountain, New Jersey, within easy

walking distance of the laboratory at the foot of the

hill in West Orange. As noted already, the latter

part of each winter is spent at Fort Myers, Florida,

where Edison has, on the banks of the Calahoutchie

River, a plantation home that is in many

ways a miniature copy of the home and laboratory

up North. Glenmont is a rather elaborate and

florid building in Queen Anne English style, of brick,

stone, and wooden beams showing on the exterior,

with an abundance of gables and balconies. It is

set in an environment of woods and sweeps of lawn,

flanked by unusually large conservatories, and

always bright in summer with glowing flower beds. It

would be difficult to imagine Edison in a stiffly formal

house, and this big, cozy, three-story, rambling mansion

has an easy freedom about it, without and within,

quite in keeping with the genius of the inventor, but

revealing at every turn traces of feminine taste and

culture. The ground floor, consisting chiefly of broad

drawing-rooms, parlors, and dining-hall, is chiefly

noteworthy for the "den," or lounging-room, at the

end of the main axis, where the family and friends

are likely to be found in the evening hours, unless

the party has withdrawn for more intimate social

intercourse to the interesting and fascinating private

library on the floor above. The lounging-room on

the ground floor is more or less of an Edison museum,

for it is littered with souvenirs from great people, and

with mementos of travel, all related to some event

or episode. A large cabinet contains awards,

decorations, and medals presented to Edison, accumulating

in the course of a long career, some of which

may be seen in the illustration opposite. Near by

may be noticed a bronze replica of the Edison gold

medal which was founded in the American Institute

of Electrical Engineers, the first award of which was

made to Elihu Thomson during the present year (1910).

There are statues of serpentine marble, gifts of the

late Tsar of Russia, whose admiration is also represented

by a gorgeous inlaid and enamelled cigar-case.



There are typical bronze vases from the Society of

Engineers of Japan, and a striking desk-set of writing

apparatus from Krupp, all the pieces being made out

of tiny but massive guns and shells of Krupp steel.

In addition to such bric-a-brac and bibelots of all

kinds are many pictures and photographs, including

the original sketches of the reception given to Edison

in 1889 by the Paris Figaro, and a letter from Madame

Carnot, placing the Presidential opera-box at the disposal

of Mr. and Mrs. Edison. One of the most conspicuous

features of the room is a phonograph equipment

on which the latest and best productions by

the greatest singers and musicians can always be

heard, but which Edison himself is everlastingly

experimenting with, under the incurable delusion that

this domestic retreat is but an extension of his

laboratory.



The big library--semi-boudoir--up-stairs is also

very expressive of the home life of Edison, but again

typical of his nature and disposition, for it is difficult

to overlay his many technical books and scientific

periodicals with a sufficiently thick crust of popular

magazines or current literature to prevent their

outcropping into evidence. In like manner the chat

and conversation here, however lightly it may begin,

turns invariably to large questions and deep problems,

especially in the fields of discovery and invention;

and Edison, in an easy-chair, will sit through

the long evenings till one or two in the morning,

pulling meditatively at his eyebrows, quoting something

he has just read pertinent to the discussion,

hearing and telling new stories with gusto, offering all

kinds of ingenious suggestions, and without fail

getting hold of pads and sheets of paper on which to

make illustrative sketches. He is wonderfully handy

with the pencil, and will sometimes amuse himself,

while chatting, with making all kinds of fancy bits

of penmanship, twisting his signature into circles and

squares, but always writing straight lines--so straight

they could not be ruled truer. Many a night it is a

question of getting Edison to bed, for he would much

rather probe a problem than eat or sleep; but at

whatever hour the visitor retires or gets up, he is sure

to find the master of the house on hand, serene and

reposeful, and just as brisk at dawn as when he

allowed the conversation to break up at midnight.

The ordinary routine of daily family life is of course

often interrupted by receptions and parties, visits to

the billiard-room, the entertainment of visitors, the

departure to and return from college, at vacation

periods, of the young people, and matters relating to

the many social and philanthropic causes in which

Mrs. Edison is actively interested; but, as a matter

of fact, Edison's round of toil and relaxation is singularly

uniform and free from agitation, and that is the

way he would rather have it.



Edison at sixty-three has a fine physique, and being

free from serious ailments of any kind, should carry

on the traditions of his long-lived ancestors as to a

vigorous old age. His hair has whitened, but is still

thick and abundant, and though he uses glasses for

certain work, his gray-blue eyes are as keen and

bright and deeply lustrous as ever, with the direct,

searching look in them that they have ever worn.

He stands five feet nine and one-half inches high,

weighs one hundred and seventy-five pounds, and

has not varied as to weight in a quarter of a

century, although as a young man he was slim to

gauntness. He is very abstemious, hardly ever

touching alcohol, caring little for meat, but fond of

fruit, and never averse to a strong cup of coffee or

a good cigar. He takes extremely little exercise,

although his good color and quickness of step would

suggest to those who do not know better that he is in

the best of training, and one who lives in the open air.



His simplicity as to clothes has already been

described. One would be startled to see him with a

bright tie, a loud checked suit, or a fancy waistcoat,

and yet there is a curious sense of fastidiousness about

the plain things he delights in. Perhaps he is not

wholly responsible personally for this state of affairs.

In conversation Edison is direct, courteous, ready to

discuss a topic with anybody worth talking to, and,

in spite of his sore deafness, an excellent listener.

No one ever goes away from Edison in doubt as to

what he thinks or means, but he is ever shy and

diffident to a degree if the talk turns on himself

rather than on his work.



If the authors were asked, after having written the

foregoing pages, to explain here the reason for Edison's

success, based upon their observations so far made,

they would first answer that he combines with a vigorous

and normal physical structure a mind capable of

clear and logical thinking, and an imagination of

unusual activity. But this would by no means offer

a complete explanation. There are many men of

equal bodily and mental vigor who have not achieved

a tithe of his accomplishment. What other factors

are there to be taken into consideration to explain

this phenomenon? First, a stolid, almost phlegmatic,

nervous system which takes absolutely no notice of

ennui--a system like that of a Chinese ivory-carver who

works day after day and month after month on a piece

of material no larger than your hand. No better

illustration of this characteristic can be found than in

the development of the nickel pocket for the storage

battery, an element the size of a short lead-pencil, on

which upward of five years were spent in experiments,

costing over a million dollars, day after day,

always apparently with the same tubes but with

small variations carefully tabulated in the note-books.

To an ordinary person the mere sight of such a tube

would have been as distasteful, certainly after a week

or so, as the smell of a quail to a man striving to eat

one every day for a month, near the end of his gastronomic

ordeal. But to Edison these small perforated

steel tubes held out as much of a fascination at the

end of five years as when the search was first begun,

and every morning found him as eager to begin the

investigation anew as if the battery was an absolutely

novel problem to which his thoughts had just been

directed.



Another and second characteristic of Edison's personality

contributing so strongly to his achievements

is an intense, not to say courageous, optimism in

which no thought of failure can enter, an optimism

born of self-confidence, and becoming--after forty or

fifty years of experience more and more a sense of

certainty in the accomplishment of success. In the

overcoming of difficulties he has the same intellectual

pleasure as the chess-master when confronted with a

problem requiring all the efforts of his skill and

experience to solve. To advance along smooth and

pleasant paths, to encounter no obstacles, to wrestle

with no difficulties and hardships--such has absolutely

no fascination to him. He meets obstruction

with the keen delight of a strong man battling with the

waves and opposing them in sheer enjoyment, and the

greater and more apparently overwhelming the forces

that may tend to sweep him back, the more vigorous his

own efforts to forge through them. At the conclusion

of the ore-milling experiments, when practically his

entire fortune was sunk in an enterprise that had to

be considered an impossibility, when at the age of

fifty he looked back upon five or six years of intense

activity expended apparently for naught, when everything

seemed most black and the financial clouds were

quickly gathering on the horizon, not the slightest

idea of repining entered his mind. The main experiment

had succeeded--he had accomplished what he

sought for. Nature at another point had outstripped

him, yet he had broadened his own sum of knowledge

to a prodigious extent. It was only during the past

summer (1910) that one of the writers spent a Sunday

with him riding over the beautiful New Jersey roads

in an automobile, Edison in the highest spirits and

pointing out with the keenest enjoyment the many

beautiful views of valley and wood. The wanderings

led to the old ore-milling plant at Edison, now

practically a mass of deserted buildings all going to decay.

It was a depressing sight, marking such titanic but

futile struggles with nature. To Edison, however, no

trace of sentiment or regret occurred, and the whole

ruins were apparently as much a matter of unconcern

as if he were viewing the remains of Pompeii. Sitting

on the porch of the White House, where he lived during

that period, in the light of the setting sun, his fine face

in repose, he looked as placidly over the scene as a

happy farmer over a field of ripening corn. All that

he said was: "I never felt better in my life than during

the five years I worked here. Hard work, nothing to

divert my thought, clear air and simple food made my

life very pleasant. We learned a great deal. It will

be of benefit to some one some time." Similarly, in

connection with the storage battery, after having

experimented continuously for three years, it was found

to fall below his expectations, and its manufacture had

to be stopped. Hundreds of thousands of dollars had

been spent on the experiments, and, largely without

Edison's consent, the battery had been very generally

exploited in the press. To stop meant not only to

pocket a great loss already incurred, facing a dark and

uncertain future, but to most men animated by

ordinary human feelings, it meant more than anything

else, an injury to personal pride. Pride? Pooh!

that had nothing to do with the really serious practical

problem, and the writers can testify that at the

moment when his decision was reached, work stopped

and the long vista ahead was peered into, Edison was

as little concerned as if he had concluded that, after all,

perhaps peach-pie might be better for present diet

than apple-pie. He has often said that time meant

very little to him, that he had but a small realization

of its passage, and that ten or twenty years were as

nothing when considering the development of a vital

invention.



These references to personal pride recall another

characteristic of Edison wherein he differs from most

men. There are many individuals who derive an intense

and not improper pleasure in regalia or military

garments, with plenty of gold braid and brass buttons,

and thus arrayed, in appearing before their friends

and neighbors. Putting at the head of the procession

the man who makes his appeal to public attention

solely because of the brilliancy of his plumage, and

passing down the ranks through the multitudes having

a gradually decreasing sense of vanity in their personal

accomplishment, Edison would be placed at the

very end. Reference herein has been made to the

fact that one of the two great English universities

wished to confer a degree upon him, but that he was

unable to leave his work for the brief time necessary

to accept the honor. At that occasion it was pointed

out to him that he should make every possible sacrifice

to go, that the compliment was great, and that but

few Americans had been so recognized. It was hope-

less--an appeal based on sentiment. Before him was

something real--work to be accomplished--a problem

to be solved. Beyond, was a prize as intangible as

the button of the Legion of Honor, which he concealed

from his friends that they might not feel he was

"showing off." The fact is that Edison cares little

for the approval of the world, but that he cares everything

for the approval of himself. Difficult as it may

be--perhaps impossible--to trace its origin, Edison

possesses what he would probably call a well-developed

case of New England conscience, for whose approval

he is incessantly occupied.



These, then, may be taken as the characteristics of

Edison that have enabled him to accomplish more

than most men--a strong body, a clear and active

mind, a developed imagination, a capacity of great

mental and physical concentration, an iron-clad nervous

system that knows no ennui, intense optimism,

and courageous self-confidence. Any one having these

capacities developed to the same extent, with the

same opportunities for use, would probably accomplish

as much. And yet there is a peculiarity about

him that so far as is known has never been referred to

before in print. He seems to be conscientiously

afraid of appearing indolent, and in consequence

subjects himself regularly to unnecessary hardship.

Working all night is seldom necessary, or until two or

three o'clock in the morning, yet even now he persists

in such tests upon his strength. Recently one of the

writers had occasion to present to him a long type-

written document of upward of thirty pages for his

approval. It was taken home to Glenmont. Edison

had a few minor corrections to make, probably not

more than a dozen all told. They could have been

embodied by interlineations and marginal notes in the

ordinary way, and certainly would not have required

more than ten or fifteen minutes of his time. Yet

what did he do? HE COPIED OUT PAINSTAKINGLY THE

ENTIRE PAPER IN LONG HAND, embodying the corrections

as he went along, and presented the result of his work

the following morning. At the very least such a task

must have occupied several hours. How can such a

trait--and scores of similar experiences could be given

--be explained except by the fact that, evidently, he

felt the need of special schooling in industry--that

under no circumstances must he allow a thought of

indolence to enter his mind?



Undoubtedly in the days to come Edison will not

only be recognized as an intellectual prodigy, but as a

prodigy of industry--of hard work. In his field as

inventor and man of science he stands as clear-cut and

secure as the lighthouse on a rock, and as indifferent

to the tumult around. But as the "old man"--

and before he was thirty years old he was affectionately

so called by his laboratory associates--he is a

normal, fun-loving, typical American. His sense of

humor is intense, but not of the hothouse, over-

developed variety. One of his favorite jokes is to

enter the legal department with an air of great

humility and apply for a job as an inventor! Never is

he so preoccupied or fretted with cares as not to drop

all thought of his work for a few moments to listen to

a new story, with a ready smile all the while, and a

hearty, boyish laugh at the end. His laugh, in fact,

is sometimes almost aboriginal; slapping his hands

delightedly on his knees, he rocks back and forth and

fairly shouts his pleasure. Recently a daily report

of one of his companies that had just been started

contained a large order amounting to several thousand

dollars, and was returned by him with a miniature

sketch of a small individual viewing that particular

item through a telescope! His facility in making

hasty but intensely graphic sketches is proverbial.

He takes great delight in imitating the lingo of the

New York street gamin. A dignified person named

James may be greeted with: "Hully Gee! Chimmy,

when did youse blow in?" He likes to mimic and

imitate types, generally, that are distasteful to him.

The sanctimonious hypocrite, the sleek speculator,

and others whom he has probably encountered in life

are done "to the queen's taste."



One very cold winter's day he entered the laboratory

library in fine spirits, "doing" the decayed dandy,

with imaginary cane under his arm, struggling to put

on a pair of tattered imaginary gloves, with a self-

satisfied smirk and leer that would have done credit

to a real comedian. This particular bit of acting was

heightened by the fact that even in the coldest weather

he wears thin summer clothes, generally acid-worn and

more or less disreputable. For protection he varies

the number of his suits of underclothing, sometimes

wearing three or four sets, according to the thermometer.



If one could divorce Edison from the idea of work,

and could regard him separate and apart from his

embodiment as an inventor and man of science, it

might truly be asserted that his temperament is essentially

mercurial. Often he is in the highest spirits,

with all the spontaneity of youth, and again he is

depressed, moody, and violently angry. Anger with

him, however, is a good deal like the story attributed

to Napoleon:



"Sire, how is it that your judgment is not affected

by your great rage?" asked one of his courtiers.



"Because," said the Emperor, "I never allow it to

rise above this line," drawing his hand across his

throat. Edison has been seen sometimes almost beside

himself with anger at a stupid mistake or inexcusable

oversight on the part of an assistant, his voice

raised to a high pitch, sneeringly expressing his feelings

of contempt for the offender; and yet when the

culprit, like a bad school-boy, has left the room,

Edison has immediately returned to his normal poise,

and the incident is a thing of the past. At other

times the unsettled condition persists, and his spleen

is vented not only on the original instigator but upon

others who may have occasion to see him, sometimes

hours afterward. When such a fit is on him the word

is quickly passed around, and but few of his associates

find it necessary to consult with him at the time. The

genuine anger can generally be distinguished from the

imitation article by those who know him intimately

by the fact that when really enraged his forehead

between the eyes partakes of a curious rotary movement

that cannot be adequately described in words.

It is as if the storm-clouds within are moving like a

whirling cyclone. As a general rule, Edison does not

get genuinely angry at mistakes and other human

weaknesses of his subordinates; at best he merely

simulates anger. But woe betide the one who has

committed an act of bad faith, treachery, dishonesty,

or ingratitude; THEN Edison can show what it is for a

strong man to get downright mad. But in this respect

he is singularly free, and his spells of anger are

really few. In fact, those who know him best are

continually surprised at his moderation and patience,

often when there has been great provocation. People

who come in contact with him and who may have

occasion to oppose his views, may leave with the

impression that he is hot-tempered; nothing could be

further from the truth. He argues his point with

great vehemence, pounds on the table to emphasize

his views, and illustrates his theme with a wealth of

apt similes; but, on account of his deafness, it is

difficult to make the argument really two-sided. Before

the visitor can fully explain his side of the matter

some point is brought up that starts Edison off again,

and new arguments from his viewpoint are poured

forth. This constant interruption is taken by many

to mean that Edison has a small opinion of any

arguments that oppose him; but he is only intensely in

earnest in presenting his own side. If the visitor

persists until Edison has seen both sides of the controversy,

he is always willing to frankly admit that his

own views may be unsound and that his opponent is

right. In fact, after such a controversy, both parties

going after each other hammer and tongs, the arguments

TO HIM being carried on at the very top of one's

voice to enable him to hear, and FROM HIM being equally

loud in the excitement of the discussion, he has often

said: "I see now that my position was absolutely

rotten. "



Obviously, however, all of these personal characteristics

have nothing to do with Edison's position in the

world of affairs. They show him to be a plain, easy-

going, placid American, with no sense of self-importance,

and ready at all times to have his mind turned

into a lighter channel. In private life they show him

to be a good citizen, a good family man, absolutely

moral, temperate in all things, and of great charitableness

to all mankind. But what of his position in the

age in which he lives? Where does he rank in the

mountain range of great Americans?



It is believed that from the other chapters of this

book the reader can formulate his own answer to the

question.
