





CHAPTER XIV



INVENTING A COMPLETE SYSTEM OF LIGHTING



IN Berlin, on December 11, 1908, with notable eclat,

the seventieth birthday was celebrated of Emil

Rathenau, the founder of the great Allgemein

Elektricitaets Gesellschaft. This distinguished German,

creator of a splendid industry, then received the

congratulations of his fellow-countrymen, headed by

Emperor William, who spoke enthusiastically of his

services to electro-technics and to Germany. In

his interesting acknowledgment, Mr. Rathenau told

how he went to Paris in 1881, and at the electrical

exhibition there saw the display of Edison's inventions

in electric lighting "which have met with as

little proper appreciation as his countless innovations

in connection with telegraphy, telephony, and the

entire electrical industry." He saw the Edison dynamo,

and he saw the incandescent lamp, "of which millions

have been manufactured since that day without the

great master being paid the tribute to his invention."

But what impressed the observant, thoroughgoing

German was the breadth with which the whole lighting

art had been elaborated and perfected, even at

that early day. "The Edison system of lighting was

as beautifully conceived down to the very details,

and as thoroughly worked out as if it had been tested

for decades in various towns. Neither sockets,

switches, fuses, lamp-holders, nor any of the other

accessories necessary to complete the installation

were wanting; and the generating of the current,

the regulation, the wiring with distributing boxes,

house connections, meters, etc., all showed signs of

astonishing skill and incomparable genius."



Such praise on such an occasion from the man who

introduced incandescent electric lighting into Germany

is significant as to the continued appreciation abroad

of Mr. Edison's work. If there is one thing modern

Germany is proud and jealous of, it is her leadership

in electrical engineering and investigation. But with

characteristic insight, Mr. Rathenau here placed his

finger on the great merit that has often been forgotten.

Edison was not simply the inventor of a new lamp

and a new dynamo. They were invaluable elements,

but far from all that was necessary. His was the

mighty achievement of conceiving and executing in

all its details an art and an industry absolutely new

to the world. Within two years this man completed

and made that art available in its essential, fundamental

facts, which remain unchanged after thirty

years of rapid improvement and widening application.



Such a stupendous feat, whose equal is far to seek

anywhere in the history of invention, is worth studying,

especially as the task will take us over much new

ground and over very little of the territory already

covered. Notwithstanding the enormous amount of

thought and labor expended on the incandescent

lamp problem from the autumn of 1878 to the winter

of 1879, it must not be supposed for one moment that

Edison's whole endeavor and entire inventive skill

had been given to the lamp alone, or the dynamo

alone. We have sat through the long watches of the

night while Edison brooded on the real solution of

the swarming problems. We have gazed anxiously at

the steady fingers of the deft and cautious Batchelor,

as one fragile filament after another refused to stay

intact until it could be sealed into its crystal prison

and there glow with light that never was before on

land or sea. We have calculated armatures and field

coils for the new dynamo with Upton, and held the

stakes for Jehl and his fellows at their winding bees.

We have seen the mineral and vegetable kingdoms

rifled and ransacked for substances that would yield

the best "filament." We have had the vague consciousness

of assisting at a great development whose

evidences to-day on every hand attest its magnitude.

We have felt the fierce play of volcanic effort, lifting

new continents of opportunity from the infertile sea,

without any devastation of pre-existing fields of human

toil and harvest. But it still remains to elucidate

the actual thing done; to reduce it to concrete

data, and in reducing, to unfold its colossal dimensions.



The lighting system that Edison contemplated in

this entirely new departure from antecedent methods

included the generation of electrical energy, or current,

on a very large scale; its distribution throughout

extended areas, and its division and subdivision

into small units converted into light at innumerable

points in every direction from the source of

supply, each unit to be independent of every oth-

er and susceptible to immediate control by the

user.



This was truly an altogether prodigious undertaking.

We need not wonder that Professor Tyndall,

in words implying grave doubt as to the possibility

of any solution of the various problems, said publicly

that he would much rather have the matter in Edison's

hands than in his own. There were no precedents,

nothing upon which to build or improve. The

problems could only be answered by the creation of

new devices and methods expressly worked out for

their solution. An electric lamp answering certain

specific requirements would, indeed, be the key to

the situation, but its commercial adaptation required

a multifarious variety of apparatus and devices. The

word "system" is much abused in invention, and

during the early days of electric lighting its use

applied to a mere freakish lamp or dynamo was often

ludicrous. But, after all, nothing short of a complete

system could give real value to the lamp as an

invention; nothing short of a system could body

forth the new art to the public. Let us therefore set

down briefly a few of the leading items needed for

perfect illumination by electricity, all of which were

part of the Edison programme:



First--To conceive a broad and fundamentally correct

method of distributing the current, satisfactory

in a scientific sense and practical commercially in its

efficiency and economy. This meant, ready made, a

comprehensive plan analogous to illumination by gas,

with a network of conductors all connected together,

so that in any given city area the lights could be fed

with electricity from several directions, thus eliminating

any interruption due to the disturbance on any

particular section.



Second--To devise an electric lamp that would give

about the same amount of light as a gas jet, which

custom had proven to be a suitable and useful unit.

This lamp must possess the quality of requiring only

a small investment in the copper conductors reaching

it. Each lamp must be independent of every

other lamp. Each and all the lights must be produced

and operated with sufficient economy to compete

on a commercial basis with gas. The lamp must

be durable, capable of being easily and safely handled

by the public, and one that would remain capable of

burning at full incandescence and candle-power a great

length of time.



Third--To devise means whereby the amount of

electrical energy furnished to each and every customer

could be determined, as in the case of gas, and

so that this could be done cheaply and reliably by a

meter at the customer's premises.



Fourth--To elaborate a system or network of conductors

capable of being placed underground or overhead,

which would allow of being tapped at any intervals,

so that service wires could be run from the

main conductors in the street into each building.

Where these mains went below the surface of the

thoroughfare, as in large cities, there must be

protective conduit or pipe for the copper conductors,

and these pipes must allow of being tapped wherever

necessary. With these conductors and pipes must

also be furnished manholes, junction-boxes, con-

nections, and a host of varied paraphernalia insuring

perfect general distribution.



Fifth--To devise means for maintaining at all

points in an extended area of distribution a practically

even pressure of current, so that all the lamps,

wherever located, near or far away from the central

station, should give an equal light at all times,

independent of the number that might be turned on; and

safeguarding the lamps against rupture by sudden

and violent fluctuations of current. There must also

be means for thus regulating at the point where the

current was generated the quality or pressure of the

current throughout the whole lighting area, with devices

for indicating what such pressure might actually

be at various points in the area.



Sixth--To design efficient dynamos, such not being

in existence at the time, that would convert economically

the steam-power of high-speed engines into

electrical energy, together with means for connecting

and disconnecting them with the exterior consumption

circuits; means for regulating, equalizing their

loads, and adjusting the number of dynamos to be

used according to the fluctuating demands on the

central station. Also the arrangement of complete

stations with steam and electric apparatus and auxiliary

devices for insuring their efficient and continuous

operation.



Seventh--To invent devices that would prevent

the current from becoming excessive upon any conductors,

causing fire or other injury; also switches

for turning the current on and off; lamp-holders,

fixtures, and the like; also means and methods for

establishing the interior circuits that were to carry

current to chandeliers and fixtures in buildings.



Here was the outline of the programme laid down

in the autumn of 1878, and pursued through all its

difficulties to definite accomplishment in about eighteen

months, some of the steps being made immediately,

others being taken as the art evolved. It is

not to be imagined for one moment that Edison performed

all the experiments with his own hands. The

method of working at Menlo Park has already been

described in these pages by those who participated.

It would not only have been physically impossible for

one man to have done all this work himself, in view

of the time and labor required, and the endless detail;

but most of the apparatus and devices invented

or suggested by him as the art took shape required

the handiwork of skilled mechanics and artisans of a

high order of ability. Toward the end of 1879 the

laboratory force thus numbered at least one hundred

earnest men. In this respect of collaboration, Edison

has always adopted a policy that must in part

be taken to explain his many successes. Some inventors

of the greatest ability, dealing with ideas and

conceptions of importance, have found it impossible

to organize or even to tolerate a staff of co-workers,

preferring solitary and secret toil, incapable of team

work, or jealous of any intrusion that could possibly

bar them from a full and complete claim to the result

when obtained. Edison always stood shoulder to

shoulder with his associates, but no one ever questioned

the leadership, nor was it ever in doubt where

the inspiration originated. The real truth is that

Edison has always been so ceaselessly fertile of ideas

himself, he has had more than his whole staff could

ever do to try them all out; he has sought co-operation,

but no exterior suggestion. As a matter of fact

a great many of the "Edison men" have made notable

inventions of their own, with which their names are

imperishably associated; but while they were with

Edison it was with his work that they were and

must be busied.



It was during this period of "inventing a system"

that so much systematic and continuous work with

good results was done by Edison in the design and

perfection of dynamos. The value of his contributions

to the art of lighting comprised in this work

has never been fully understood or appreciated, having

been so greatly overshadowed by his invention of

the incandescent lamp, and of a complete system of

distribution. It is a fact, however, that the principal

improvements he made in dynamo-electric generators

were of a radical nature and remain in the art.

Thirty years bring about great changes, especially

in a field so notably progressive as that of the

generation of electricity; but different as are the

dynamos of to-day from those of the earlier period,

they embody essential principles and elements that

Edison then marked out and elaborated as the conditions

of success. There was indeed prompt appreciation

in some well-informed quarters of what Edison

was doing, evidenced by the sensation caused in the

summer of 1881, when he designed, built, and shipped

to Paris for the first Electrical Exposition ever held,

the largest dynamo that had been built up to that

time. It was capable of lighting twelve hundred

incandescent lamps, and weighed with its engine

twenty-seven tons, the armature alone weighing six

tons. It was then, and for a long time after, the

eighth wonder of the scientific world, and its arrival

and installation in Paris were eagerly watched by

the most famous physicists and electricians of Europe.



Edison's amusing description of his experience

in shipping the dynamo to Paris when built may

appropriately be given here: "I built a very large

dynamo with the engine directly connected, which I

intended for the Paris Exposition of 1881. It was

one or two sizes larger than those I had previously

built. I had only a very short period in which to get

it ready and put it on a steamer to reach the Exposition

in time. After the machine was completed we

found the voltage was too low. I had to devise a way

of raising the voltage without changing the machine,

which I did by adding extra magnets. After this

was done, we tested the machine, and the crank-shaft

of the engine broke and flew clear across the shop.

By working night and day a new crank-shaft was put

in, and we only had three days left from that time to

get it on board the steamer; and had also to run a

test. So we made arrangements with the Tammany

leader, and through him with the police, to clear the

street--one of the New York crosstown streets--and

line it with policemen, as we proposed to make a

quick passage, and didn't know how much time it

would take. About four hours before the steamer

had to get it, the machine was shut down after the

test, and a schedule was made out in advance of what

each man had to do. Sixty men were put on top of

the dynamo to get it ready, and each man had written

orders as to what he was to perform. We got it all

taken apart and put on trucks and started off. They

drove the horses with a fire-bell in front of them to

the French pier, the policemen lining the streets.

Fifty men were ready to help the stevedores get it on

the steamer--and we were one hour ahead of time."



This Exposition brings us, indeed, to a dramatic

and rather pathetic parting of the ways. The hour

had come for the old laboratory force that had done

such brilliant and memorable work to disband, never

again to assemble under like conditions for like effort,

although its members all remained active in the field,

and many have ever since been associated prominently

with some department of electrical enterprise. The

fact was they had done their work so well they must

now disperse to show the world what it was, and assist

in its industrial exploitation. In reality, they were

too few for the demands that reached Edison from

all parts of the world for the introduction of his

system; and in the emergency the men nearest to

him and most trusted were those upon whom he could

best depend for such missionary work as was now

required. The disciples full of fire and enthusiasm,

as well as of knowledge and experience, were soon

scattered to the four winds, and the rapidity with

which the Edison system was everywhere successfully

introduced is testimony to the good judgment

with which their leader had originally selected them

as his colleagues. No one can say exactly just how this

process of disintegration began, but Mr. E. H. John-

son had already been sent to England in the Edison

interests, and now the question arose as to what

should be done with the French demands and the

Paris Electrical Exposition, whose importance as a

point of new departure in electrical industry was

speedily recognized on both sides of the Atlantic. It

is very interesting to note that as the earlier staff

broke up, Edison became the centre of another large

body, equally devoted, but more particularly

concerned with the commercial development of his ideas.

Mr. E. G. Acheson mentions in his personal notes on

work at the laboratory, that in December of 1880,

while on some experimental work, he was called to

the new lamp factory started recently at Menlo Park,

and there found Edison, Johnson, Batchelor, and

Upton in conference, and "Edison informed me that

Mr. Batchelor, who was in charge of the construction,

development, and operation of the lamp factory, was

soon to sail for Europe to prepare for the exhibit to

be made at the Electrical Exposition to be held in Paris

during the coming summer." These preparations overlap

the reinforcement of the staff with some notable

additions, chief among them being Mr. Samuel Insull,

whose interesting narrative of events fits admirably

into the story at this stage, and gives a vivid idea of

the intense activity and excitement with which the

whole atmosphere around Edison was then surcharged:

"I first met Edison on March 1, 1881. I

arrived in New York on the City of Chester about five

or six in the evening, and went direct to 65 Fifth

Avenue. I had come over to act as Edison's private

secretary, the position having been obtained for me

through the good offices of Mr. E. H. Johnson, whom

I had known in London, and who wrote to Mr. U. H.

Painter, of Washington, about me in the fall of 1880.

Mr. Painter sent the letter on to Mr. Batchelor, who

turned it over to Edison. Johnson returned to

America late in the fall of 1880, and in January, 1881,

cabled to me to come to this country. At the time

he cabled for me Edison was still at Menlo Park, but

when I arrived in New York the famous offices of the

Edison Electric Light Company had been opened at

`65' Fifth Avenue, and Edison had moved into New

York with the idea of assisting in the exploitation of

the Light Company's business.



"I was taken by Johnson direct from the Inman

Steamship pier to 65 Fifth Avenue, and met Edison

for the first time. There were three rooms on the

ground floor at that time. The front one was used

as a kind of reception-room; the room immediately

behind it was used as the office of the president of

the Edison Electric Light Company, Major S. B.

Eaton. The rear room, which was directly back of

the front entrance hall, was Edison's office, and there

I first saw him. There was very little in the room

except a couple of walnut roller-top desks--which were

very generally used in American offices at that time.

Edison received me with great cordiality. I think

he was possibly disappointed at my being so young

a man; I had only just turned twenty-one, and had

a very boyish appearance. The picture of Edison is

as vivid to me now as if the incident occurred

yesterday, although it is now more than twenty-nine

years since that first meeting. I had been connected

with Edison's affairs in England as private secretary

to his London agent for about two years; and had

been taught by Johnson to look on Edison as the

greatest electrical inventor of the day--a view of

him, by-the-way, which has been greatly strengthened

as the years have rolled by. Owing to this, and

to the fact that I felt highly flattered at the appointment

as his private secretary, I was naturally prepared

to accept him as a hero. With my strict English

ideas as to the class of clothes to be worn by a

prominent man, there was nothing in Edison's dress

to impress me. He wore a rather seedy black diagonal

Prince Albert coat and waistcoat, with trousers of a

dark material, and a white silk handkerchief around

his neck, tied in a careless knot falling over the stiff

bosom of a white shirt somewhat the worse for wear.

He had a large wide-awake hat of the sombrero pattern

then generally used in this country, and a rough,

brown overcoat, cut somewhat similarly to his Prince

Albert coat. His hair was worn quite long, and hanging

carelessly over his fine forehead. His face was

at that time, as it is now, clean shaven. He was full

in face and figure, although by no means as stout as

he has grown in recent years. What struck me above

everything else was the wonderful intelligence and

magnetism of his expression, and the extreme brightness

of his eyes. He was far more modest than in

my youthful picture of him. I had expected to find

a man of distinction. His appearance, as a whole,

was not what you would call `slovenly,' it is best

expressed by the word `careless.' "



Mr. Insull supplements this pen-picture by another,

bearing upon the hustle and bustle of the moment:

"After a short conversation Johnson hurried me off to

meet his family, and later in the evening, about eight

o'clock, he and I returned to Edison's office; and I

found myself launched without further ceremony into

Edison's business affairs. Johnson had already explained

to me that he was sailing the next morning,

March 2d, on the S.S. Arizona, and that Mr. Edison

wanted to spend the evening discussing matters in

connection with his European affairs. It was assumed,

inasmuch as I had just arrived from London,

that I would be able to give more or less information

on this subject. As Johnson was to sail the next

morning at five o'clock, Edison explained that it

would be necessary for him to have an understanding

of European matters. Edison started out by drawing

from his desk a check-book and stating how much

money he had in the bank; and he wanted to know

what European telephone securities were most salable,

as he wished to raise the necessary funds to put

on their feet the incandescent lamp factory, the

Electric Tube works, and the necessary shops to build

dynamos. All through the interview I was tremendously

impressed with Edison's wonderful resourcefulness

and grasp, and his immediate appreciation of

any suggestion of consequence bearing on the subject

under discussion.



"He spoke with very great enthusiasm of the work

before him--namely, the development of his electric-

lighting system; and his one idea seemed to be to

raise all the money he could with the object of pouring

it into the manufacturing side of the lighting

business. I remember how extraordinarily I was impressed

with him on this account, as I had just come

from a circle of people in London who not only questioned

the possibility of the success of Edison's invention,

but often expressed doubt as to whether the

work he had done could be called an invention at all.

After discussing affairs with Johnson--who was receiving

his final instructions from Edison--far into

the night, and going down to the steamer to see Johnson

aboard, I finished my first night's business with

Edison somewhere between four and five in the morning,

feeling thoroughly imbued with the idea that I

had met one of the great master minds of the world.

You must allow for my youthful enthusiasm, but

you must also bear in mind Edison's peculiar gift of

magnetism, which has enabled him during his career

to attach so many men to him. I fell a victim to the

spell at the first interview."



Events moved rapidly in those days. The next

morning, Tuesday, Edison took his new fidus Achates

with him to a conference with John Roach, the famous

old ship-builder, and at it agreed to take the AEtna

Iron works, where Roach had laid the foundations

of his fame and fortune. These works were not in

use at the time. They were situated on Goerck

Street, New York, north of Grand Street, on the

east side of the city, and there, very soon after, was

established the first Edison dynamo-manufacturing

establishment, known for many years as the Edison

Machine Works. The same night Insull made his

first visit to Menlo Park. Up to that time he had

seen very little incandescent lighting, for the simple

reason that there was very little to see. Johnson

had had a few Edison lamps in London, lit up from

primary batteries, as a demonstration; and in the

summer of 1880 Swan had had a few series lamps

burning in London. In New York a small gas-engine

plant was being started at the Edison offices on Fifth

Avenue. But out at Menlo Park there was the first

actual electric-lighting central station, supplying

distributed incandescent lamps and some electric motors

by means of underground conductors imbedded in

asphaltum and surrounded by a wooden box. Mr. Insull

says: "The system employed was naturally the

two-wire, as at that time the three-wire had not been

thought of. The lamps were partly of the horseshoe

filament paper-carbon type, and partly bamboo-filament

lamps, and were of an efficiency of 95 to 100

watts per 16 c.p. I can never forget the impression

that this first view of the electric-lighting industry

produced on me. Menlo Park must always be looked

upon as the birthplace of the electric light and

power industry. At that time it was the only place

where could be seen an electric light and power

multiple arc distribution system, the operation of

which seemed as successful to my youthful mind as

the operation of one of the large metropolitan systems

to-day. I well remember about ten o'clock that night

going down to the Menlo Park depot and getting the

station agent, who was also the telegraph operator, to

send some cable messages for me to my London

friends, announcing that I had seen Edison's incandescent

lighting system in actual operation, and that

so far as I could tell it was an accomplished fact. A

few weeks afterward I received a letter from one of

my London friends, who was a doubting Thomas,

upbraiding me for coming so soon under the spell of

the `Yankee inventor.' "



It was to confront and deal with just this element

of doubt in London and in Europe generally, that the

dispatch of Johnson to England and of Batchelor to

France was intended. Throughout the Edison staff

there was a mingled feeling of pride in the work,

resentment at the doubts expressed about it, and keen

desire to show how excellent it was. Batchelor left

for Paris in July, 1881--on his second trip to Europe

that year--and the exhibit was made which brought

such an instantaneous recognition of the incalculable

value of Edison's lighting inventions, as evidenced

by the awards and rewards immediately bestowed

upon him. He was made an officer of the Legion of

Honor, and Prof. George F. Barker cabled as follows

from Paris, announcing the decision of the expert

jury which passed upon the exhibits: "Accept my

congratulations. You have distanced all competitors

and obtained a diploma of honor, the highest

award given in the Exposition. No person in any

class in which you were an exhibitor received a like

reward."



Nor was this all. Eminent men in science who had

previously expressed their disbelief in the statements

made as to the Edison system were now foremost in

generous praise of his notable achievements, and accorded

him full credit for its completion. A typical

instance was M. Du Moncel, a distinguished electrician,

who had written cynically about Edison's work

and denied its practicability. He now recanted publicly

in this language, which in itself shows the state

of the art when Edison came to the front: "All these

experiments achieved but moderate success, and when,

in 1879, the new Edison incandescent carbon lamp

was announced, many of the scientists, and I,

particularly, doubted the accuracy of the reports which

came from America. This horseshoe of carbonized

paper seemed incapable to resist mechanical shocks

and to maintain incandescence for any considerable

length of time. Nevertheless, Mr. Edison was not

discouraged, and despite the active opposition made

to his lamp, despite the polemic acerbity of which he

was the object, he did not cease to perfect it; and

he succeeded in producing the lamps which we now

behold exhibited at the Exposition, and are admired

by all for their perfect steadiness."



The competitive lamps exhibited and tested at this

time comprised those of Edison, Maxim, Swan, and

Lane-Fox. The demonstration of Edison's success

stimulated the faith of his French supporters, and

rendered easier the completion of plans for the Societe

Edison Continental, of Paris, formed to operate

the Edison patents on the Continent of Europe. Mr.

Batchelor, with Messrs. Acheson and Hipple, and one

or two other assistants, at the close of the Exposition

transferred their energies to the construction and

equipment of machine-shops and lamp factories at

Ivry-sur-Seine for the company, and in a very short

time the installation of plants began in various

countries--France, Italy, Holland, Belgium, etc.



All through 1881 Johnson was very busy, for his

part, in England. The first "Jumbo" Edison dynamo

had gone to Paris; the second and third went to

London, where they were installed in 1881 by Mr.

Johnson and his assistant, Mr. W. J. Hammer, in the

three-thousand-light central station on Holborn Viaduct,

the plant going into operation on January 12,

1882. Outside of Menlo Park this was the first regular

station for incandescent lighting in the world, as

the Pearl Street station in New York did not go into

operation until September of the same year. This

historic plant was hurriedly thrown together on

Crown land, and would doubtless have been the

nucleus of a great system but for the passage of the

English electric lighting act of 1882, which at once

throttled the industry by its absurd restrictive

provisions, and which, though greatly modified, has left

England ever since in a condition of serious inferiority

as to development in electric light and power. The

streets and bridges of Holborn Viaduct were lighted

by lamps turned on and off from the station, as well

as the famous City Temple of Dr. Joseph Parker, the

first church in the world to be lighted by incandescent

lamps--indeed, so far as can be ascertained, the first

church to be illuminated by electricity in any form.

Mr. W. J. Hammer, who supplies some very interesting

notes on the installation, says: "I well remember

the astonishment of Doctor Parker and his associates

when they noted the difference of temperature as

compared with gas. I was informed that the people

would not go in the gallery in warm weather, owing

to the great heat caused by the many gas jets, whereas

on the introduction of the incandescent lamp there

was no complaint." The telegraph operating-room

of the General Post-Office, at St. Martin's-Le Grand

and Newgate Street nearby, was supplied with four

hundred lamps through the instrumentality of Mr.

(Sir) W. H. Preece, who, having been seriously sceptical

as to Mr. Edison's results, became one of his most

ardent advocates, and did much to facilitate the

introduction of the light. This station supplied its

customers by a network of feeders and mains of the

standard underground two-wire Edison tubing-conductors

in sections of iron pipe--such as was

used subsequently in New York, Milan, and other

cities. It also had a measuring system for the

current, employing the Edison electrolytic meter.

Arc lamps were operated from its circuits, and one of

the first sets of practicable storage batteries was

used experimentally at the station. In connection

with these batteries Mr. Hammer tells a characteristic

anecdote of Edison: "A careless boy passing through

the station whistling a tune and swinging carelessly

a hammer in his hand, rapped a carboy of sulphuric

acid which happened to be on the floor above a

`Jumbo' dynamo. The blow broke the glass carboy,

and the acid ran down upon the field magnets of

the dynamo, destroying the windings of one of the

twelve magnets. This accident happened while I

was taking a vacation in Germany, and a prominent

scientific man connected with the company cabled

Mr. Edison to know whether the machine would work

if the coil was cut out. Mr. Edison sent the laconic

reply: `Why doesn't he try it and see?' Mr. E. H.

Johnson was kept busy not only with the cares and

responsibilities of this pioneer English plant, but by

negotiations as to company formations, hearings before

Parliamentary committees, and particularly by

distinguished visitors, including all the foremost

scientific men in England, and a great many well-

known members of the peerage. Edison was fortunate

in being represented by a man with so much

address, intimate knowledge of the subject, and powers

of explanation. As one of the leading English

papers said at the time, with equal humor and truth:

`There is but one Edison, and Johnson is his prophet.' "



As the plant continued in operation, various details

and ideas of improvement emerged, and Mr. Hammer

says: "Up to the time of the construction of this

plant it had been customary to place a single-pole

switch on one wire and a safety fuse on the other;

and the practice of putting fuses on both sides of a

lighting circuit was first used here. Some of the first,

if not the very first, of the insulated fixtures were

used in this plant, and many of the fixtures were

equipped with ball insulating joints, enabling the

chandeliers--or `electroliers'--to be turned around,

as was common with the gas chandeliers. This particular

device was invented by Mr. John B. Verity,

whose firm built many of the fixtures for the Edison

Company, and constructed the notable electroliers

shown at the Crystal Palace Exposition of 1882."



We have made a swift survey of developments from

the time when the system of lighting was ready for

use, and when the staff scattered to introduce it. It

will be readily understood that Edison did not sit

with folded hands or drop into complacent satisfac-

tion the moment he had reached the practical stage

of commercial exploitation. He was not willing to

say "Let us rest and be thankful," as was one of

England's great Liberal leaders after a long period of

reform. On the contrary, he was never more active

than immediately after the work we have summed

up at the beginning of this chapter. While he had

been pursuing his investigations of the generator in

conjunction with the experiments on the incandescent

lamp, he gave much thought to the question of

distribution of the current over large areas, revolving

in his mind various plans for the accomplishment of

this purpose, and keeping his mathematicians very

busy working on the various schemes that suggested

themselves from time to time. The idea of a

complete system had been in his mind in broad outline

for a long time, but did not crystallize into

commercial form until the incandescent lamp was an

accomplished fact. Thus in January, 1880, his first

patent application for a "System of Electrical

Distribution" was signed. It was filed in the Patent

Office a few days later, but was not issued as a patent

until August 30, 1887. It covered, fundamentally,

multiple arc distribution, how broadly will be understood

from the following extracts from the New York

Electrical Review of September 10, 1887: "It would

appear as if the entire field of multiple distribution were

now in the hands of the owners of this patent....

The patent is about as broad as a patent can be, being

regardless of specific devices, and laying a powerful grasp

on the fundamental idea of multiple distribution from

a number of generators throughout a metallic circuit."



Mr. Edison made a number of other applications

for patents on electrical distribution during the year

1880. Among these was the one covering the celebrated

"Feeder" invention, which has been of very

great commercial importance in the art, its object

being to obviate the "drop" in pressure, rendering

lights dim in those portions of an electric-light system

that were remote from the central station.[10]





[10] For further explanation of "Feeder" patent, see Appendix.





From these two patents alone, which were absolutely

basic and fundamental in effect, and both of which

were, and still are, put into actual use wherever

central-station lighting is practiced, the reader will see

that Mr. Edison's patient and thorough study, aided

by his keen foresight and unerring judgment, had

enabled him to grasp in advance with a master hand

the chief and underlying principles of a true system--

that system which has since been put into practical use

all over the world, and whose elements do not need the

touch or change of more modern scientific knowledge.



These patents were not by any means all that he

applied for in the year 1880, which it will be remembered

was the year in which he was perfecting the

incandescent electric lamp and methods, to put into

the market for competition with gas. It was an

extraordinarily busy year for Mr. Edison and his

whole force, which from time to time was increased

in number. Improvement upon improvement was

the order of the day. That which was considered

good to-day was superseded by something better and

more serviceable to-morrow. Device after device,

relating to some part of the entire system, was designed,

built, and tried, only to be rejected ruthlessly

as being unsuitable; but the pursuit was not abandoned.

It was renewed over and over again in innumerable

ways until success had been attained.



During the year 1880 Edison had made application

for sixty patents, of which thirty-two were in relation

to incandescent lamps; seven covered inventions

relating to distributing systems (including the two

above particularized); five had reference to inventions

of parts, such as motors, sockets, etc.; six covered

inventions relating to dynamo-electric machines;

three related to electric railways, and seven to

miscellaneous apparatus, such as telegraph relays,

magnetic ore separators, magneto signalling apparatus, etc.



The list of Mr. Edison's patents (see Appendices)

is not only a monument to his life's work, but serves

to show what subjects he has worked on from year

to year since 1868. The reader will see from an

examination of this list that the years 1880, 1881,

1882, and 1883 were the most prolific periods of invention.

It is worth while to scrutinize this list

closely to appreciate the wide range of his activities.

Not that his patents cover his entire range of work

by any means, for his note-books reveal a great number

of major and minor inventions for which he has not

seen fit to take out patents. Moreover, at the period

now described Edison was the victim of a dishonest

patent solicitor, who deprived him of a number of

patents in the following manner:



"Around 1881-82 I had several solicitors attending

to different classes of work. One of these did me a

most serious injury. It was during the time that I

was developing my electric-lighting system, and I

was working and thinking very hard in order to cover

all the numerous parts, in order that it would be

complete in every detail. I filed a great many

applications for patents at that time, but there were

seventy-eight of the inventions I made in that period

that were entirely lost to me and my company by

reason of the dishonesty of this patent solicitor.

Specifications had been drawn, and I had signed

and sworn to the application for patents for these

seventy-eight inventions, and naturally I supposed

they had been filed in the regular way.



"As time passed I was looking for some action of

the Patent Office, as usual, but none came. I thought

it very strange, but had no suspicions until I began

to see my inventions recorded in the Patent Office

Gazette as being patented by others. Of course I

ordered an investigation, and found that the patent

solicitor had drawn from the company the fees for

filing all these applications, but had never filed them.

All the papers had disappeared, however, and what

he had evidently done was to sell them to others,

who had signed new applications and proceeded to

take out patents themselves on my inventions. I

afterward found that he had been previously mixed

up with a somewhat similar crooked job in connection

with telephone patents.



"I am free to confess that the loss of these seventy-

eight inventions has left a sore spot in me that has

never healed. They were important, useful, and

valuable, and represented a whole lot of tremendous

work and mental effort, and I had had a feeling of

pride in having overcome through them a great

many serious obstacles, One of these inventions covered

the multipolar dynamo. It was an elaborated

form of the type covered by my patent No. 219,393

which had a ring armature. I modified and improved

on this form and had a number of pole pieces placed

all around the ring, with a modified form of armature

winding. I built one of these machines and ran it

successfully in our early days at the Goerck Street shop.



"It is of no practical use to mention the man's

name. I believe he is dead, but he may have left

a family. The occurrence is a matter of the old

Edison Company's records."



It will be seen from an examination of the list of

patents in the Appendix that Mr. Edison has continued

year after year adding to his contributions to

the art of electric lighting, and in the last twenty-

eight years--1880-1908--has taken out no fewer

than three hundred and seventy-five patents in this

branch of industry alone. These patents may be

roughly tabulated as follows:



Incandescent lamps and their manufacture....................149

Distributing systems and their control and regulation....... 77

Dynamo-electric machines and accessories....................106

Minor parts, such as sockets, switches, safety catches,

meters, underground conductors and parts, etc............... 43





Quite naturally most of these patents cover inventions

that are in the nature of improvements or based

upon devices which he had already created; but there

are a number that relate to inventions absolutely

fundamental and original in their nature. Some of

these have already been alluded to; but among the

others there is one which is worthy of special mention

in connection with the present consideration of

a complete system. This is patent No. 274,290,

applied for November 27, 1882, and is known as the

"Three-wire" patent. It is described more fully in

the Appendix.



The great importance of the "Feeder" and "Three-

wire" inventions will be apparent when it is realized

that without them it is a question whether electric

light could be sold to compete with low-priced gas,

on account of the large investment in conductors

that would be necessary. If a large city area were

to be lighted from a central station by means of

copper conductors running directly therefrom to all

parts of the district, it would be necessary to install

large conductors, or suffer such a drop of pressure

at the ends most remote from the station as to

cause the lights there to burn with a noticeable

diminution of candle-power. The Feeder invention

overcame this trouble, and made it possible to use

conductors ONLY ONE-EIGHTH THE SIZE that would otherwise

have been necessary to produce the same results.



A still further economy in cost of conductors was

effected by the "Three-wire" invention, by the use

of which the already diminished conductors could be

still further reduced TO ONE-THIRD of this smaller size,

and at the same time allow of the successful operation

of the station with far better results than if it

were operated exactly as at first conceived. The

Feeder and Three-wire systems are at this day used

in all parts of the world, not only in central-station

work, but in the installation and operation of isolated

electric-light plants in large buildings. No sensible

or efficient station manager or electric contractor

would ever think of an installation made upon any

other plan. Thus Mr. Edison's early conceptions of

the necessities of a complete system, one of them

made even in advance of practice, have stood firm,

unimproved, and unchanged during the past twenty-

eight years, a period of time which has witnessed

more wonderful and rapid progress in electrical science

and art than has been known during any similar art

or period of time since the world began.



It must be remembered that the complete system

in all its parts is not comprised in the few of Mr.

Edison's patents, of which specific mention is here

made. In order to comprehend the magnitude and

extent of his work and the quality of his genius, it is

necessary to examine minutely the list of patents

issued for the various elements which go to make up

such a system. To attempt any relation in detail

of the conception and working-out of each part or

element; to enter into any description of the almost

innumerable experiments and investigations that were

made would entail the writing of several volumes, for

Mr. Edison's close-written note-books covering these

subjects number nearly two hundred.



It is believed that enough evidence has been given

in this chapter to lead to an appreciation of the

assiduous work and practical skill involved in "inventing

a system" of lighting that would surpass, and

to a great extent, in one single quarter of a century,

supersede all the other methods of illumination

developed during long centuries. But it will be ap-

propriate before passing on to note that on January

17, 1908, while this biography was being written,

Mr. Edison became the fourth recipient of the John

Fritz gold medal for achievement in industrial progress.

This medal was founded in 1902 by the professional

friends and associates of the veteran American

ironmaster and metallurgical inventor, in honor

of his eightieth birthday. Awards are made by a

board of sixteen engineers appointed in equal numbers

from the four great national engineering societies

--the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American

Institute of Mining Engineers, the American Society

of Mechanical Engineers, and the American

Institute of Electrical Engineers, whose membership

embraces the very pick and flower of professional

engineering talent in America. Up to the time of

the Edison award, three others had been made. The

first was to Lord Kelvin, the Nestor of physics in

Europe, for his work in submarine-cable telegraphy

and other scientific achievement. The second was

to George Westinghouse for the air-brake. The third

was to Alexander Graham Bell for the invention and

introduction of the telephone. The award to Edison

was not only for his inventions in duplex and quadruplex

telegraphy, and for the phonograph, but for the

development of a commercially practical incandescent

lamp, and the development of a complete system

of electric lighting, including dynamos, regulating

devices, underground system, protective devices, and

meters. Great as has been the genius brought to

bear on electrical development, there is no other man

to whom such a comprehensive tribute could be paid.

