




Edison, His Life and Inventions



by Frank Lewis Dyer and Thomas Commerford Martin






GENERAL COUNSEL FOR THE EDISON LABORATORY

AND ALLIED INTERESTS



AND



THOMAS COMMERFORD MARTIN

EX-PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE

OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS







INTRODUCTION



PRIOR to this, no complete, authentic, and authorized

record of the work of Mr. Edison, during an active life,

has been given to the world. That life, if there is anything

in heredity, is very far from finished; and while it continues

there will be new achievement.



An insistently expressed desire on the part of the

public for a definitive biography of Edison was the

reason for the following pages. The present authors

deem themselves happy in the confidence reposed in

them, and in the constant assistance they have enjoyed

from Mr. Edison while preparing these pages,

a great many of which are altogether his own. This

co-operation in no sense relieves the authors of

responsibility as to any of the views or statements of

their own that the book contains. They have realized

the extreme reluctance of Mr. Edison to be made the

subject of any biography at all; while he has felt that,

if it must be written, it were best done by the hands

of friends and associates of long standing, whose judgment

and discretion he could trust, and whose intimate

knowledge of the facts would save him from

misrepresentation.



The authors of the book are profoundly conscious

of the fact that the extraordinary period of electrical

development embraced in it has been prolific of great

men. They have named some of them; but there

has been no idea of setting forth various achievements

or of ascribing distinctive merits. This treatment

is devoted to one man whom his fellow-citizens

have chosen to regard as in many ways representative

of the American at his finest flowering in

the field of invention during the nineteenth century.



It is designed in these pages to bring the reader face

to face with Edison; to glance at an interesting childhood

and a youthful period marked by a capacity for

doing things, and by an insatiable thirst for knowledge;

then to accompany him into the great creative

stretch of forty years, during which he has done so

much. This book shows him plunged deeply into

work for which he has always had an incredible

capacity, reveals the exercise of his unsurpassed

inventive ability, his keen reasoning powers, his

tenacious memory, his fertility of resource; follows

him through a series of innumerable experiments,

conducted methodically, reaching out like rays of

search-light into all the regions of science and nature,

and finally exhibits him emerging triumphantly from

countless difficulties bearing with him in new arts

the fruits of victorious struggle.



These volumes aim to be a biography rather than

a history of electricity, but they have had to cover so

much general ground in defining the relations and

contributions of Edison to the electrical arts, that they

serve to present a picture of the whole development

effected in the last fifty years, the most fruitful that

electricity has known. The effort has been made to

avoid technique and abstruse phrases, but some

degree of explanation has been absolutely necessary

in regard to each group of inventions. The task of

the authors has consisted largely in summarizing

fairly the methods and processes employed by Edison;

and some idea of the difficulties encountered by

them in so doing may be realized from the fact that

one brief chapter, for example,--that on ore milling--

covers nine years of most intense application and

activity on the part of the inventor. It is something

like exhibiting the geological eras of the earth in an

outline lantern slide, to reduce an elaborate series

of strenuous experiments and a vast variety of

ingenious apparatus to the space of a few hundred

words.



A great deal of this narrative is given in Mr. Edison's

own language, from oral or written statements

made in reply to questions addressed to him with

the object of securing accuracy. A further large part

is based upon the personal contributions of many

loyal associates; and it is desired here to make grateful

acknowledgment to such collaborators as Messrs.

Samuel Insull, E. H. Johnson, F. R. Upton, R. N

Dyer, S. B. Eaton, Francis Jehl, W. S. Andrews, W.

J. Jenks, W. J. Hammer, F. J. Sprague, W. S. Mallory,

an, C. L. Clarke, and others, without whose aid

the issuance of this book would indeed have been

impossible. In particular, it is desired to acknowledge

indebtedness to Mr. W. H. Meadowcroft not only for

substantial aid in the literary part of the work, but

for indefatigable effort to group, classify, and summarize

the boundless material embodied in Edison's

note-books and memorabilia of all kinds now kept

at the Orange laboratory. Acknowledgment must

also be made of the courtesy and assistance of Mrs.

Edison, and especially of the loan of many interesting

and rare photographs from her private collection.
