


Lecture XIII

Sovereignty and Empire

    The word 'law' has come down to us in close association with
two notions, the notion of order and the notion of force. The
association is of considerable antiquity and is disclosed by a
considerable variety of languages, and the problem has repeatedly
suggested itself, which of the two notions thus linked together
is entitled to precedence over the other, which of them is first
in point of mental conception? The answer, before the Analytical
Jurists wrote, would on the whole have been that 'law' before all
things implied order. 'Law, in its most general and comprehensive
sense, signifies a rule of action, and is applied
indiscriminately to all kinds of action, whether animate or
inanimate, rational or irrational. Thus we say, the laws of
motion, of gravitation, of optics or mechanics, as well as the
laws of nature and of nations.' With these words Blackstone
begins that Chapter on 'the Nature of Laws in General,' which may
almost be said to have made Bentham and Austin into Jurists by
virtue of sheer repulsion. The Analytical Jurists, on the other
hand, lay down unhesitatingly that the notion of force has
priority over the notion of order. They say that a true law, the
command of an irresistible Sovereign, enjoins a class of acts or
a class of omissions either on a subject or on a number. of
subjects, placed by the command alike and indifferently under a
legal obligation. The characteristic which thus as a matter of
fact attaches to most true laws of binding a number of persons,
taken indifferently, to a number of acts or omissions, determined
generally, has caused the term 'law' to be extended by metaphor
to all uniformities or invariable successions in the physical
world, in the operations of the mind, or in the actions of
mankind. Law when used in such expressions as the Law of Gravity
the Law of Mental Association, or the Law of Rent is treated by
the Analytical Jurists as a word wrested from its true meaning by
an inaccurate figurative extension, and the sort of disrespect
with which they speak of it is extremely remarkable. But I
suppose that, if dignity and importance can properly be
attributed to a word, there are in our day few words more
dignified and more important than Law, in the sense of the
invariable succession of phenomena, physical, mental, or even
politico-economical. With this meaning, 'law' enters into a great
deal of modern thought, and has almost become the condition of
its being carried on. It is difficult at first to believe that
such an expression as 'the Reign of Law,' in the sense in which
the words have been popularised by the Duke of Argyll's book,
would have been strongly disliked by Austin; but his language
leaves little doubt on the point, and more than once reminds us
that, though his principal writings are not much more than forty
years old, he wrote before men's ideas were leavened to the
present depth by the sciences of experiment and observation. The
statement that, in all languages, Law primarily means the command
of a Sovereign, and has been applied derivatively to the orderly
sequences of Nature is extremely difficult of verification. and
it may be doubted whether its value, if it be true, wOuld repay
the labour of establishing its truth. The difficulty would be the
greater because the known history of philosophical and juridical
speculation shows us the two notions, which as a matter of fact
are associated with Law, acting and reacting on one another. The
order of Nature has unquestionably been regarded as determined by
a Sovereign command. Many persons to whom the pedigree of much of
modern thought is traceable, conceived the particles of matter
which make up the universe as obeying the commands of a personal
God just as literally as subjects obey the commands of a
sovereign through fear of a penal sanction. On the other hand,
the contemplation of order in the external world has strongly
influenced the view taken of laws proper by much of the civilised
part of mankind. The Roman theory of a Law Natural has affected
the whole history of law, and this famous theory is in fact
compounded of two elements, one furnished by an early perception,
Greek in origin, of a certain order and regularity in physical
nature, and the other attributable to an early perception, Roman
in origin, of a certain order and uniformity among the
observances of the human race. I need not here repeat the proof
of this which I attempted to give in a volume published some
years ago. Nobody is at liberty to censure men or communities of
men for using words in any sense they please, or with as many
meanings as they please, but the duty of the scientific enquirer
is to distinguish the meanings of an important word from one
another, to select the meaning appropriate to his own purposes,
and consistently to employ the word during his investigations in
this sense and no other. The laws with which the student of
Jurisprudence is concerned in our own day are undoubtedly either
the actual commands of Sovereigns, understood as the portion of
the community endowed with irresistible coercive force, or else
they are practices of mankind brought under the formula 'a law is
a command,' by help of the formula, 'whatever the Sovereign
permits, is his command.' From the point of view of the Jurist,
law is only associated with order through the necessary condition
of every true law that it must prescribe a class of acts or
omissions, or a number of acts and omissions determined
generally; the law which prescribes a single act not being a true
law, but being distinguished as an 'occasional' or 'particular'
command. Law, thus defined and limited, is the subject-matter of
Jurisprudence as conceived by the Analytical Jurists. At present
we are only concerned with the foundations of their system; and
the questions which I wish to raise in the present Lecture are
these: has the force which compels obedience to a law always been
of such a nature that it can reasonably be identified with the
coercive force of the Sovereign, and have laws always been
characterised by that generality which, it is said, alone
connects them with physical laws or general formulas describing
the facts of nature? These enquiries may seem to you to lead us
far afield, but I trust you will perceive in the end that they
have interest and importance, and that they throw light on the
limits which must be assigned in certain cases, not to the
theoretical soundness, but to the practical value, of the
speculations we have been discussing.
    Let me recur to Sovereignty, as conceived by the Analytical
Jurists. The readers of Austin's treatise will remember his
examination of a number of existing governments or (as he would
say), forms of political superiority and inferiority, for the
purpose of determining the exact seat of sovereignty in each of
them. This is among the most interesting parts of his writings,
and his sagacity and originality are nowhere more signally
demonstrated. The problem had become much more complex than it
was when Hobbes wrote, and even than it was at the date of
Bentham's earlier publications. Hobbes, a partisan in England,
was a keen scientific observer of the political phenomena of the
Continent, and there the political conditions open to his
observation were (putting England aside) practically limited to
despotism and anarchy. But, by the time Austin wrote, England,
probably considered by Hobbes as the ground on which the battle
of his principles was to he fought out, had long since become a
'limited monarchy,' an expression disliked by Hobbes' successors
almost as much as the thing was by Hobbes himself, and moreover
the influences of the first French Revolution were beginning to
have their play. France had lately become a limited monarchy, and
almost all the other Continental States had given signs of
becoming so. The complex political mechanism of the United States
had arisen on the other side of the Atlantic, and the even more
complicated systems of the German and Swiss Confederations in
Continental Europe. The analysis of political societies, for the
purpose of determining the seat of sovereignty, had obviously
become much more difficult, and nothing can exceed the
penetration evinced by Austin in applying this analysis to extant
examples.
    Nevertheless Austin fully recognises the existence of
communities, or aggregates of men, in which no dissection could
disclose a person or group answering to his definition of a
Sovereign. In the first place, like Hobbes, he fully allows that
there is a state of anarchy. Wherever such a state is found, the
question of Sovereignty is being actively fought out, and the
instance given by Austin is that which was never absent from
Hobbes's mind, the struggle between Charles the First and his
Parliament. An acute critic of Hobbes and Austin, whom I am
permitted to identify with Mr Fitzjames Stephen, insists that
there is a condition of dormant anarchy, and the reservation is
doubtless made to meet such cases as that of the United States
before the War of Secession. Here the seat of sovereignty was for
years the subject of violent dispute in words or on paper, and
many eminent Americans acquired fame by measures which
compromised for a time a notorious difference of principle, and
adjourned a struggle which was nevertheless inevitable. It is in
fact quite possible that there may be deliberate abstinence from
fighting out a question known to be undecided, and I see no
objection to calling the temporary equilibrium thus produced a
state of dormant anarchy. Austin further admits the theoretical
possibility of a state of nature. He does not attach to it the
importance which belongs to it in the speculations of Hobbes and
others, but he allows its existence wherever a number of men, or
of groups not numerous enough to be political, have not as yet
been brought under any common or habitually acting authority.
And, in speaking in this last sentence of groups not numerous
enough to be political, I have introduced the most remarkable
exception allowed by Austin to the rule that Sovereignty is
universal among mankind. The passage occurs at p. 237 of the
first volume of the third edition: --
    'Let us suppose that a single family of savages lives in
absolute estrangement from every other community. And let us
suppose that the father, the chief of this insulated family,
receives habitual obedience from the mother and children. Now,
since it is not a limb of another and larger community, the
society formed by the parents and children, is clearly an
independent society, and, since the rest of its members
habitually obey its chief, this independent society would form a
society political, in case the number of its members were not
extremely minute. But, since the number of its members is
extremely minute, it would, I believe, be esteemed a society in a
state of nature; that is, a society consisting of persons not in
a state of subjection. Without an application of the terms, which
would somewhat smack of the ridiculous, we could hardly style the
society a society political and independent, the imperative
father and chief a monarch or sovereign, or the obedient mother
and children subjects.'
    And then Austin quotes from Montesquieu the doctrine that
'Political power necessarily implies the union of several
families.'
    The effect of this passage then is that a society may be too
small to admit of the application of the theory. The employment,
Austin says, of his terminology would be ridiculous in such a
case. I believe I shall be able to point out to you the
significance of this appeal to our sense of absurdity, generally
a a most dangerous criterion; but at present I merely ask you to
note the seriousness of the admission, since the form of
authority about which it is made, the authority of the Patriarch
or Paterfamilias over his family, is, at least according to one
modern theory, the element or germ out of which all permanent
power of man over man has been gradually developed.
    There are, however, another set of cases, known to us from
sources of knowledge of which it is perhaps fair to say that
(though Austin is in one sense a modern writer) they were hardly
open when he wrote -- cases in which the application of his
principles is at least difficult and doubtful. It is from no
special love of Indian examples that I take one from India, but
because it happens to be the most modern precedent in point. My
instance is the Indian Province called the Punjaub, the Country
of the Five Rivers, in the state in which it was for about a
quarter of a century before its annexation to the British Indian
Empire. After passing through every conceivable phase of anarchy
and dormant anarchy, it fell under the tolerably consolidated
dominion of a half-military, half-religious oligarchy, known as
the Sikhs. The Sikhs themselves were afterwards reduced to
subjection by a single chieftain belonging to their order,
Runjeet Singh. At first sight, there could be no more perfect
embodiment than Runjeet Singh of Sovereignty, as conceived by
Austin. He was absolutely despotic. Except occasionally on his
wild frontier, he kept the most perfect order. He could have
commanded anything; the smallest disobedience to his commands
would have been followed by death or mutilation, and this was
perfectly well known to the enormous majority of his subjects.
Yet I doubt whether once in all his life he issued a command
which Austin would call a law. He took, as his revenue, a
prodigious share of the produce of the soil. He harried villages
which recalcitrated at his exactions, and he executed great
numbers of men. He levied great armies; he had all material of
power, and exercised it in various ways. But he never made a law.
The rules which regulated the life of his subjects were derived
from their immemorial usages, and these rules were administered
by domestic tribunals, in families or village-communities -- that
is, in groups no larger or little larger than those to which the
application of Austin's principles cannot be effected, on his own
admission, without absurdity.
    I do not for a moment assert that the existence of such a
state of political society falsifies Austin's theory, as a
theory. The great maxim by which objections to it are disposed of
is, as I have so often said before, 'What the Sovereign permits,
he commands.' The Sikh despot permitted heads of house holds and
village-elders to prescribe rules, therefore these rules were his
commands and true laws. Now we can see that an answer of this
kind might have some force if it were made to an English lawyer
who denied that the Sovereign in England had ever commanded the
Common law. The Crown and Parliament command it, because the
Crown and Parliament permit it; and the proof that they permit it
is that they could change it. As a matter of fact, since the
objection was first advanced, the Common law has been largely
encroached upon by Act of Parliament, and, in our own day, it is
possible that it may come to owe the whole of its binding force
to statute. But my Oriental example shows that the difficulty
felt by the old lawyers about the Common law may have once
deserved more respect than it obtained from Hobbes and his
successors. Runjeet Singh never did or could have dreamed of
changing the civil rules under which his subjects lived. Probably
he was as strong a believer in the independent obligatory force
of such rules as the elders themselves who applied them. An
Eastern or Indian theorist in law, to whom the assertion was made
that Runjeet Singh commanded these rules, would feel it stinging
him exactly in that sense of absurdity to which Austin admits the
appeal to be legitimate. The theory remains true in such a case,
but the truth is only verbal.
    You must not suppose that I have been indulging in a merely
curious speculation about a few extreme cases to which the theory
of Sovereignty, and of Law founded on it, will not apply without
straining of language. In the first place, the Punjaub under
Runjeet Singh may be taken as a type of all Oriental communities
in their native state, during their rare intervals of peace and
order. They have ever been despotisms, and the commands of the
despots at their head, harsh and cruel as they might be, have
always been implicitly obeyed. But then these commands, save in
so far as they served to organise administrative machinery for
the collection of revenue, have not been true laws; they have
been of the class called by Austin occasional or particular
commands. The truth is that the one solvent of local and domestic
usage in those parts of the world of which We have any real
knowledge has been not the command of the Sovereign but the
supposed command of the Deity. In India, the influence of the
Brahminical treatises on mixed law and religion in sapping the
old customary law of the country has always been great, and in
some particulars, as I tried to explain on a former occasion, it
has become greater under English rule.
    It is important to observe that, for the purposes of the
present enquiry, the state of political society which I have
described as Indian or Oriental is a far more trustworthy clue to
the former condition of the greatest part of the world than is
the modern social organisation of Western Europe, as we see it
before our eyes. It is a perhaps not unreasonable impression that
Sovereignty was simpler and more easily discovered in the ancient
than in the modern world. The critic of Hobbes and Austin, whom I
before quoted, writes, 'in every state of which we read, whether
Greek, Phoenician, Italian, or Asiatic, there was a Sovereign of
some sort whose authority was absolute while it lasted;' and he
adds that, 'if Hobbes had tried to write an imaginary history of
mankind he could not have constructed one better fitted for his
purpose than the history of the foundation and establishment of
the Roman Empire.' I put aside for awhile the consideration of
the Roman Empire, and my reasons for doing so will become
apparent afterwards; but, if we give our attention to empires at
all resembling that of the Romans in territorial extent, we shall
find that, properly understood, they are very far from
corresponding to the Great Leviathan imagined by Hobbes. We know
something of the Assyrian and Babylonian Empires from Jewish
records, and something of the Median and Persian Empires from
Greek records. We learn from these that they were in the main
tax-taking empires. We know that they raised enormous revenues
from their subjects. We know that, for occasional wars of
conquest, they levied vast armies from populations spread over
immense areas. We know that they exacted the most implicit
obedience to their occasional commands, or punished disobedience
with the utmost cruelty. We know that the monarchs at their head
were constantly dethroning petty kings and even transplanting
whole communities. But amid all this, it is clear that in the
main they interfered but little with the every day religious or
civil life of the groups to which their subjects belonged. They
did not legislate. The 'royal statute' and 'firm decree' which
has been preserved to us as a sample of 'law of the Medes and
Persians which altereth not' is not a law at all in the modern
juridical acceptation of the term. It is what Austin would call a
'particular command,' a sudden, spasmodic, and temporary
interference with ancient multifarious usage left in general
undisturbed. What is even more instructive is that the famous
Athenian Empire belonged to the same class of sovereignties as
the Empire of the Great King. The Athenian Assembly made true
laws for residents on Attic territory, but the dominion of Athens
over her subject cities and islands was clearly a tax-taking as
distinguished from a legislating Empire.
    The difficulty of employing Austin's terminology of these
great governments is obvious enough. How can it conduce to clear
thinking to speak of the Jewish law as commanded at one period by
the Great King at Susa? The cardinal rule of the Analytical
Jurists, 'what the Sovereign permits, he commands,' remains
verbally true, but against its application in such a case there
lies an appeal to a higher tribunal of which Austin allows the
jurisdiction, our sense of the ridiculous.
    I have now reached the point at which I can conveniently
state my own opinion of the practical limitations which must be
given to the system of the Analytical Jurists, in order that it
may possess, I will not say theoretical truth, but practical
value. The Western world, to which they confined their attention,
must be conceived as having undergone two sets of changes. The
States of modern Europe must be conceived as having been formed
in a manner different from the great empires of antiquity (save
one), and from the modern empires and kingdoms of the East, and a
new order of ideas on the subject of legislation must be
conceived as having been introduced into the world through the
empire of the Romans. Unless these changes had taken place, I do
not believe that the system would ever have been engendered in
the brain of its authors. Wherever these changes have not taken
place, I do not believe the application of the system to be of
value.
    The most nearly universal fact which can be asserted
respecting the origin of the political communities called States
is that they were formed by the coalescence of groups, the
original group having been in no case smaller than the
patriarchal family. But in the communities which came into
existence before the Roman Empire, and in those which have been
slightly affected by it or not at all, this coalescence was soon
arrested. There are some traces of the process everywhere. The
hamlets of Attica coalesce to form the Athenian State; and the
primitive Roman State is formed by the coalescence of the minute
communities on the original hills. In very many Indian
village-communities there are signs of smaller elements combining
to make them up. But this earlier coalescence soon stops. In a
later stage, political communities, wearing a superficial
resemblance to the Roman Empire, and often of very great
territorial extent, are constructed by one community conquering
another or one chieftain, at the head of a single community or
tribe, subjugating great masses of population. But, independently
of the Roman Empire and its influence, the separate local life of
the small societies included in these great States was not
extinguished or even much enfeebled. They continued as the Indian
village-community has continued, and indeed, even in their most
glorious forms, they belonged essentially to that type of
society. But the process of change by which the States of the
modern world were formed has been Materially different from this.
The smaller groups have been much more completely broken up and
absorbed in the larger, the larger have again been swallowed up
in still wider, and these in yet wider areas. Local life and
village custom have not, it is true, decayed everywhere in the
same degree. There is much more of them in Russia than in
Germany; more of them in Germany than in England; more of them in
England than in France. But on the whole, whenever the modern
State is formed, it is an assemblage of fragments considerably
smaller than those which made up empires of the earlier type, and
considerably liker to one another.
    It would be rash to lay down confidently which is cause and
which is consequence, but unquestionably this completer
trituration in modern societies of the groups which once lived
with an independent life has proceeded concurrently with much
greater activity in legislation. Wherever the primitive condition
of an Aryan race reveals itself either through historical records
or through the survival of its ancient institutions, the organ
which in the elementary group corresponds to what we call the
legislature, is everywhere discernible. It is the Village
Council, sometimes owning a responsibility to the entire body of
villagers, sometimes disclaiming it, sometimes overshadowed by
the authority of an hereditary chief, but never altogether
obscured. From this embryo have sprung all the most famous
legislatures of the world, the Athenian Ekklesia, the Roman
Comitia, Senate and Prince, and our own Parliament, the type and
parent of all the 'collegiate sovereignties' (as Austin would
call them) of the modern world, or in other words of all
governments in which sovereign power is exercised by the people
or shared between the people and the King. Yet, if we examine the
undeveloped form of this organ of State, its legislative faculty
is its least distinct and least energetic faculty. In point of
fact, as I have observed elsewhere, the various shades of the
power lodged with the Village Council, under the empire of the
ideas proper to it, are not distinguished from one another, nor
does the mind see a clear difference between making a law,
declaring a law, and punishing an offender against a law. If the
powers of this body must be described by modern names, that which
lies most in the background is legislative power, that which is
most distinctly conceived is judicial power. The laws obeyed are
regarded as having always existed, and usages really new are
confounded with the really old.
    The village-communities of the Aryan race do not therefore
exercise true legislative power so long as they remain under
primitive influences. Nor again is legislative power exercised in
any intelligible sense of the words by the Sovereigns of those
great States, now confined to the East, which preserve the
primitive local groups most nearly intact. Legislation, as we
conceive it, and the break up of local life appear to have
universally gone on together. Compare the Hindoo
village-community in India with the Teutonic village-community in
England. The first of them, among all the institutions of the
country which are not modern and of British construction, is far
the most definite, far the most strongly marked, far the most
highly organised. Of the latter, the ancient English community,
the vestiges may certainly be tracked, but the comparative method
has to be called in, and the written law and written history of
many centuries searched, before their significance can be
understood and the broken outline restored to completeness. It is
impossible not to connect the differing vitality of the same
institution with certain other phenomena of the two countries. In
India, Mogul and Mahratta, following a long series of earlier
conquerors, have swept over the village-communities, but after
including them in a nominal empire they have imposed no permanent
obligation beyond the payment of tax or tribute. If on some rare
occasions they have attempted the enforced religious conversion
of subjugated populations, the temples and the rites have been at
most changed. in the villages, while the civil institutions have
been left untouched. Here in England the struggle between the
central and the local power has followed a very different course.
We can see plainly that the King's law and the King's courts have
been perpetually contending against the local law and the local
courts, and the victory of the King's law has drawn after it the
long series of Acts of Parliament founded on its principles. The
whole process can only be called legislation ever increasing in
energy, until the ancient multifarious law of the country has
been all but completely abolished, and the old usages of the
independent communities have degenerated into the customs of
manors or into mere habits having no sanction from law.
    There is much reason to believe that the Roman Empire was the
source of the influences which have led, immediately or
ultimately, to the formation of highly-centralised,
actively-legislating, States. It was the first great dominion
which did not merely tax, but legislated also. The process was
spread over many centuries. If I had to fix the epochs of its
commencement and completion, I should place them roughly at the
issue of the first Edictum Provinciale, and at the extension of
the Roman citizenship to all subjects of the empire, but no doubt
the foundations of the change were laid considerably before the
first period, and it was continued in some ways long after the
last. But, in the result, a vast and miscellaneous mass of
customary law was broken up and replaced by new institutions.
Seen in this light, the Roman Empire is accurately described in
the Prophecy of Daniel. It devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped
the residue with its feet.
    The irruption of the barbarian races into the Empire diffused
through the communities included in it a multitude of the
primitive tribal and village ideas which they had lost.
Nevertheless no society directly or indirectly influenced by the
Empire has been altogether like the societies formed on that more
ancient system which the immobility of the East has continued
till we can actually observe it. In all commonwealths of the
first kind, Sovereignty is more or less distinctly associated
with legislative power, and the direction in which this power was
to be exercised was in a considerable number of countries clearly
chalked out by the jurisprudence which the Empire left behind it.
The Roman law, from which the most ancient legal notions had been
almost wholly expelled, was palpably the great solvent of local
usage everywhere. There are thus two types of organised political
society. In the more ancient of these, the great bulk of men
derive their rules of life from the customs of their village or
city, but they occasionally, though most implicitly, obey the
commands of an absolute ruler who takes taxes from them but never
legislates, In the other, and the one with which we are most
familiar, the Sovereign is ever more actively legislating on
principles of his own, while local custom and idea are ever
hastening to decay. It seems to me that in the passage from one
of these political systems to another, laws have distinctly
altered their character. The Force, for example, which is at the
back of law, can only be called the same by a mere straining of
language. Customary law -- a subject on which all of Austin's
remarks seem to me comparatively unfruitful -- is not obeyed, as
enacted law is obeyed. When it obtains over small areas and in
small natural groups, the penal sanctions on which it depends are
partly opinion, partly superstition, but to a far greater extent
an instinct almost as blind and unconscious as that which
produces some of the movements of our bodies. The actual
constraint which is required to secure conformity with usage is
inconceivably small. When, however, the rules which have to be
obeyed once emanate from an authority external to the small
natural group and forming no part of it, they wear a character
wholly unlike that of a customary rule. They lose the assistance
of superstition, probably that of opinion, certainly that of
spontaneous impulse. The force at the back of law comes therefore
to be purely coercive force to a degree quite unknown in
societies of the more primitive type. Moreover, in many
communities, this force has to act at a very great distance from
the bulk of the persons exposed to it, and thus the Sovereign who
wields it has to deal with great classes of acts and with great
classes of persons, rather than with isolated acts and with
individuals. Among the consequences of this necessity are many of
the characteristics sometimes supposed to be inseparable from
laws, their indifferency, their inexorableness, and their
generality.
    And as the conception of Force associated with laws has
altered, so also, I think, has the conception of Order. In the
elementary social groups formed by men of the Aryan race, nothing
can be more monotonous than the routine of village custom.
Nevertheless, in the interior of the households which together
make up the village-community, the despotism of usage is replaced
by the despotism of paternal authority. Outside each threshold is
immemorial custom blindly obeyed; inside is the Patria Potestas
exercised by a half-civilised man over wife, child, and slave. So
far then as laws are commands, they would be associated in this
stage of society less with invariable order than with inscrutable
caprice; and it is easier to suppose the men of those times
looking to the succession of natural phenomena, day and night,
summer and winter, for types of regularity, than to the words and
actions of those above them who possessed coercive power over
them.
    The Force then which is at the back of laws was not always
the same. The Order which goes with them was not always the same.
They have only gradually attracted to themselves the attributes
which seem essential to them not only in the popular view but to
the penetrating eye of the Analytical Jurist, Their generality
and their dependence on the coercive force of a Sovereign are the
result of the great territorial area of modern States, of the
comminution of the sub-groups which compose them, and above all
of the example and influence of the Roman Commonwealth under
Assembly, Senate, and Prince, which from very early times was
distinguished from all other dominations and powers in that it
brake up more thoroughly that which it devoured.
    It has sometimes been said of great systems of thought that
nothing but an accident prevented their coming into existence
centuries before their actual birth. No such assertion can be
made of the system of the Analytical Jurists, which could not
have been conceived in the brain of its authors till the time was
fully ripe for it. Hobbes's great doctrine is plainly the result
of a generalisation which he had opportunities unrivalled in that
day for effecting, since during the virility of his intellect he
was as much on the Continent as in England, first as a travelling
tutor and afterwards as an exile flying from civil disturbances.
Independently of English affairs, which he certainly viewed as a
strong partisan, the phenomena which he had to observe were
governments rapidly centralising themselves, local privileges and
jurisdictions in extreme decay, the old historical bodies, such
as the French Parliaments, tending for the time to become
furnaces of anarchy, the only hope of order discoverable in
kingly power. These were among the palpable fruits of the wars
which end ed in the Peace of Westphalia. The old multiform local
activity of feudal or quasi-feudal society was everywhere
enfeebled or destroyed; if it had continued, the system of this
great thinker would almost certainly have never seen the light;
we have heard of a village Hampden, but a village Hobbes is
inconceivable. By the time Bentham wrote, and while he was
writing, the conditions which suggest the Analytical System of
Jurisprudence presented themselves still more distinctly. A
Sovereign who was a democracy commenced, and a Sovereign who was
a despot completed, the Codification of the laws of France. There
had never before in the modern world been so striking an
exemplification of the proposition that, what the Sovereign
permits, he commands, because he could at any time substitute an
express command for his tacit permission, nor so impressive a
lesson in the far-reaching and on the whole most beneficial
results which might be expected from the increased activity of
Sovereigns in legislation proper.
    No geniuses of an equally high order so completely divorced
themselves from history as Hobbes and Bentham, or appear, to me
at all events, so completely under the impression that the world
had always been more or less as they saw it. Bentham could never
get rid of the idea that imperfect or perverse applications of
his principles had produced many things with which they had
nothing whatever to do, and I know no more striking instance of
an historical misconception (though at the time a very natural
one) than Hobbes's comparison of privileged corporations and
organised local groups to the parasites which the physiology then
becoming fashionable had shown to live in the internal membranes
of the human body. We now know that, if we are forced to use a
physiological illustration, these groups must rather be compared
to the primary cells out of which the whole human body has been
built up.
    But, if the Analytical Jurists failed to see a great deal
which can only be explained by the help of history, they saw a
great deal which even in our day is imperfectly seen by those
who, so to speak, let themselves drift with history. Sovereignty
and Law, regarded as facts, had only gradually assumed a shape in
which they answered to the conception of them formed by Hobbes,
Bentham, and Austin, but the correspondence really did exist by
their time, and was tending constantly to become more perfect.
They were thus able to frame a juridical terminology which had
for one virtue that it was rigidly consistent with itself, and
for another that, if it did not completely express facts, the
qualifications of its accuracy were never serious enough to
deprive it of value and tended moreover to become less and less
important as time went on. No conception of law and society has
ever removed such a mass of undoubted delusion. The force at the
disposal of Sovereigns did in fact act largely through laws as
understood by these Jurists, but it acted confusedly,
hesitatingly, with many mistakes and vast omissions. They for the
first time saw all that it was capable of effecting, if it was
applied boldly and consistently. All that has followed is a
testimony to their sagacity, I do not know a single law-reform
effected since Bentham's day which cannot be traced to his
influence; but a still more startling proof of the clearing of
the brain produced by this system, even in an earlier stage, may
be found in Hobbes. In his 'Dialogue of the Common Laws,' he
argues for a fusion of law and equity, a registration of titles
to land, and a systematic penal code -- three measures which we
are on the eve of seeing carried out at this very moment.
    The capital fact in the mechanism of modern States is the
energy of legislatures. Until the fact existed, I do not, as I
have said, believe that the system of Hobbes, Bentham and Austin
could have been conceived; wherever it exhibits itself
imperfectly, I think that the system is never properly
appreciated. The comparative neglect with which German writers
have treated it seems to me to be explained by the comparative
recency of legislative activity in Germany. It is however
impossible to observe on the connection between legislation and
the analytical theory of law without having the mind carried to
the famous addition which Bentham and Austin engrafted on the
speculations of Hobbes. This addition consisted in coupling them
with the doctrine or theory of utility -- of the greatest
happiness of the greatest number -- considered as the basis of
law and morals. What, then, is the connection, essential or
historical, between the utilitarian theory and the analytical
theory of law? I certainly do not affect to be able, especially
at the close of a lecture, to exhaust a subject of such extent
and difficulty, but I have a few words to say of it. To myself
the most interesting thing about the theory of Utility is that it
presupposes the theory of Equality. The greatest number is the
greatest number of men taken as units; 'one shall only count for
one,' said Bentham emphatically and over and over again. In fact,
the most conclusive objection to the doctrine would consist in
denying this equality; and I have myself heard an Indian Brahmin
dispute it on the ground that, according to the clear teaching of
his religion, a Brahmin was entitled to twenty times as much
happiness as anybody else. Now how did this fundamental
assumption of equality, which (I may observe) broadly
distinguishes Bentham's theories from some systems with which it
is supposed to share the reproach of having pure selfishness for
its base -- how did it suggest itself to Bentham's mind? He saw
plainly -- nobody more clearly -- that men are not as a fact
equal; the proposition that men are by nature equal he expressly
denounced as an anarchical sophism. Whence then came the equality
which is a postulate of his famous doctrine about the greatest
happiness of the greatest number? I venture to think that this
doctrine is nothing more than a working rule of legislation, and
that in this form it was originally conceived by Bentham. Assume
a numerous and tolerably homogeneous community -- assume a
Sovereign whose commands take a legislative shape assume great
energy, actual or potential, in this legislature -- the only
possible, the only conceivable, principle which can guide
legislation on a great scale is the greatest happiness of the
greatest number. It is in fact a condition of legislation which,
like certain characteristics of laws, has grown out of the
distance from which sovereign power acts upon subjects in modern
political societies, and of the necessity under which it is
thereby placed of neglecting differences, even real differences,
between the units of which they are composed. Bentham was in
truth neither a jurist nor a moralist in the proper sense of the
word. He theorises not on law but on legislation; when carefully
examined, he may be seen to be a legislator even in morals. No
doubt his language seems sometimes to imply that he is explaining
moral phenomena; in reality he wishes to alter or re-arrange them
according to a working rule gathered from his reflections on
legislation. This transfer of his working rule from legislation
to morality seems to me the true ground of the criticisms to
which Bentham is justly open as an analyst of moral facts.


