


Lecture VIII

The Growth and Diffusion of Primitive Ideas



    Mr Tylor has justly observed that the true lesson of the new
science of Comparative Mythology is the barrenness in primitive
times of the faculty which we most associate with mental
fertility, the Imagination. Comparative Jurisprudence, as might
be expected from the natural stability of law and custom, yet
more strongly suggests the same inference, and points to the
fewness of ideas and the slowness of additions to the mental
stock as among the most general characteristics of mankind in its
infancy.
    The fact that the generation of new ideas does not proceed in
all states of society as rapidly as in that to which we belong,
is only not familiar to us through our inveterate habit of
confining our observation of human nature to a small portion of
its phenomena. When we undertake to examine it, we are very apt
to look exclusively at a part of Western Europe and perhaps of
the American Continent. We constantly leave aside India, China,
and the whole Mahometan East. This limitation of our field of
vision is perfectly justifiable when we are occupied with the
investigation of the laws of Progress. Progress is, in fact, the
same thing as the continued production of new ideas, and we can
only discover the law of this production by examining sequences
of ideas where they are frequent and of considerable length. But
the primitive condition of the progressive societies is best
ascertained from the observable condition of those which are
non-progressive; and thus we leave a serious gap in our knowledge
when we put aside the mental state of the millions upon millions
of men who fill what we vaguely call the East as a phenomenon of
little interest and of no instructiveness. The fact is not
unknown to most of us that, among these multitudes, Literature,
Religion, and Art -- or what corresponds to them -- move always
within a distinctly drawn circle of unchanging notions; but the
fact that this condition of thought is rather the infancy of the
human mind prolonged than a different maturity from that most
familiar to us, is very seldom brought home to us with a
clearness rendering it fruitful of instruction.
    I do not, indeed, deny that the difference between the East
and the West, in respect of the different speed at which new
ideas are produced, is only a difference of degree. There were
new ideas produced in India even during the disastrous period
just before the English entered it, and in the earlier ages this
production must have been rapid. There must have been a series of
ages during which the progress of China was very steadily
maintained, and doubtless our assumption of the absolute
immobility of the Chinese and other societies is in part the
expression of our ignorance. Conversely, I question whether new
ideas come into being in the West as rapidly as modern literature
and conversation sometimes suggest. It cannot, indeed, be doubted
that causes, unknown to the ancient world, lead among us to the
multiplication of ideas. Among them are the never ceasing
discovery of new facts of nature, inventions changing the
circumstances and material conditions of life, and new rules of
social conduct; the chief of this last class, and certainly the
most powerful in the domain of law proper, I take to be the
famous maxim that all institutions should be adapted to produce
the greatest happiness of the greatest number. Nevertheless,
there are not a few signs that even conscious efforts to increase
the number of ideas have a very limited success. Look at Poetry
and Fiction. From time to time one mind endowed with the
assemblage of qualities called genius makes a great and sudden
addition to the combinations of thought, word, and sound which it
is the province of those arts to produce; yet as suddenly, after
one or a few such efforts, the productive activity of both
branches of invention ceases, and they settle down into
imitativeness for perhaps a century at a time. An humbler example
may be sought in rules of social habit. We speak of the caprices
of Fashion; yet, on examining them historically, we find them
singularly limited, so much so, that we are sometimes tempted to
regard Fashion as passing through cycles of form ever repeating
themselves. There are, in fact, more natural limitations on the
fertility of intellect than we always admit to ourselves, and
these, reflected in bodies of men, translate themselves into that
weariness of novelty which seems at intervals to overtake whole
Western societies, including minds of every degree of information
and cultivation.
    My present object is to point out some of the results of
mental sterility at a time when society is in the stage which we
have been considering. Then, the relations between man and man
were summed up in kinship. The fundamental assumption was that
all men, not united with you by blood, were your enemies or your
slaves. Gradually the assumption became untrue in fact, and men,
who were not blood relatives, became related to one another on
terms of peace and mutual tolerance or mutual advantage Yet no
new ideas came into being exactly harmonising with the new
relation, nor was any new phraseology invented to express it. The
new member of each group was spoken of as akin to it, was treated
as akin to it, was thought of as akin to it. So little were ideas
changed that, as we shall see, the very affections and emotions
which the natural bond evoked were called forth in extraordinary
strength by the artificial tie. The clear apprehension of these
facts throws light on several historical problems, and among them
on some of Irish history. Yet they ought not greatly to surprise
us, since, in a modified form, they make part of our everyday
experience. Almost everybody can observe that, when new
circumstances arise, we use our old ideas to bring them home to
us; it is only afterwards, and sometimes long afterwards, that
our ideas are found to have changed. An English Court of Justice
is in great part an engine for working out this process. New
combinations of circumstance are constantly arising, but in the
first instance they are exclusively interpreted according to old
legal ideas. A little later lawyers admit that the old ideas are
not quite what they were before the new circumstances arose.
    The slow generation of ideas in ancient times may first be
adduced as necessary to the explanation of that great family of
Fictions which meet us on the threshold of history and historical
jurisprudence. Specimens of these fictions may be collected on
all sides from bodies of archaic custom or rudimentary systems of
law, but those most to our present purpose are fictitious
assumptions of blood-relationship. Elsewhere I have pointed out
the strange conflict between belief or theory and what seems to
us notorious fact, which is observable in early Roman and
Hellenic society. 'It may be affirmed of early commonwealths that
their citizens considered all the groups in which they claimed
membership to be founded on common lineage. What was obviously
true of the Family was believed to be true first of the House,
next of the Tribe, lastly of the State. And yet we find that,
along with this belief, each community preserved records or
traditions which distinctly showed that the fundamental
assumption was false. Whether we look to the Greek States, or to
Rome, or to the Teutonic aristocracies in Ditmarsh which
furnished Niebuhr with so many valuable illustrations, or to the
Celtic clan associations, or to that strange social organisation
of the Sclavonic Russians and Poles which has only lately
attracted notice, everywhere we discover traces of passages in
their history when men of alien descent were admitted to, and
amalgamated with, the original brotherhood. Adverting to Rome
singly, we perceive that the primary group, the Family, was being
constantly adulterated by the practice of adoption, while stories
seem to have been always current respecting the exotic extraction
of one of the original Tribes, and concerning a large addition to
the Houses made by one of the early Kings. The composition of the
State uniformly assumed to be natural was nevertheless known to
be in great measure artificial.' (Ancient Law, pp. 129, 130.) The
key to these singular phenomena has been recently sought in the
ancient religions, and has been supposed to be found in the
alleged universal practice of worshipping dead ancestors. Very
striking illustrations of them are, however, supplied by the law
and usage of Ireland after it had been Christianised for
centuries, and long after any Eponymous progenitor can be
conceived as worshipped . The Family, House, and Tribe of the
Romans -- and, so far as my knowledge extends, all the analogous
divisions of Greek communities -- were distinguished by separate
special names. But in the Brehon Law, the same word, Fine (or
'family'), is used for the Family as we ordinarily understand it
-- that is, for the children of a living parent and their
descendants -- for the Sept or, in phrase of Indian law, the
Joint Undivided Family, that is, the combined descendants of an
ancestor long since dead -- for the Tribe, which was the
political unit of ancient Ireland, and even for the large Tribes
in which the smaller units were sometimes absorbed. Nevertheless
the Irish Family undoubtedly received additions through Adoption.
The Sept, or larger group of kindred, had a definite place for
strangers admitted to it on stated conditions, the Fine Taccair.
The Tribe avowedly included a number of persons, mostly refugees
from other Tribes, whose only connection with it was common
allegiance to its Chief. Moreover the Tribe in its largest
extension and considered a political as well as a social unit
might have been absorbed with others in a Great or Arch Tribe,
and here the sole source of the kinship still theoretically
maintained is Conquest. Yet all these groups were in some sense
or other Families.
    Nor does the artificiality solely consist in the extension of
the sphere of kinship to classes known to have been originally
alien to the true brotherhood. An even more interesting example
of it presents itself when the ideas of kinship and the
phraseology proper to consanguinity are extended to associations
which we should now contemplate as exclusively founded on
contract, such as partnerships and guilds. There are no more
interesting pages in Dr Sullivan's Introduction (pp. ccvi et
seq.) than those in which he discusses the tribal origin of
Guilds. He claims for the word itself a Celtic etymology, and he
traces the institution to the grazing partnerships common among
the ancient Irish. However this may be, it is most instructive to
find the same words used to describe bodies of co-partners,
formed by contract, and bodies of co-heirs or co-parceners formed
by common descent. Each assemblage of men seems to have been
conceived as a Family. As regards Guilds, I certainly think, as I
thought three years ago, that they have been much too confidently
attributed to a relatively modern origin; and that many of them,
and much which is common to all of them, may be suspected to have
grown out of the primitive brotherhoods of co-villagers and
kinsmen. The trading guilds which survive in our own country have
undergone every sort of transmutation which can disguise their
parentage. They are artificial to begin with, though the
hereditary principle has a certain tendency to assert itself.
They have long since relinquished the occupations which gave them
a name. They mostly trace their privileges and constitution to
some royal charter; and kingly grants, real or fictitious, are
the great cause of interruption in English History. Yet anybody
who, with a knowledge of primitive law and history, examines the
internal mechanism and proceedings of a London Company will see
in many parts of them plain traces of the ancient brotherhood of
kinsmen, 'joint in food, worship, and estate;' and I suppose that
the nearest approach to an ancient tribal holding in Ireland is
to be found in those confiscated lands which are now the property
of several of these Companies.
    The early history of Contract, I need scarcely tell you, is
almost exclusively to be sought in the history of Roman law. Some
years ago I pointed to the entanglement which primitive Roman
institutions disclose between the conveyance of property and the
contract of sale. Let me now observe that one or two others of
the great Roman contracts appear to me, when closely examined, to
afford evidence of their having been gradually evolved through
changes in the mechanism of primitive society. You have seen how
brotherhoods of kinsmen transform themselves into alliances
between persons whom we can only call partners, but still at
first sight the link is missing which would enable us to say that
here we have the beginning of the contract of partnership. Look,
however, at the peculiar contract called by the Romans 'societas
omnium (or universorum) bonorum.' It is commonly translated
'partnership with unlimited liability,' and there is no doubt
that the elder form of partnership has had great effect on the
newer form. But you will find that, in the societas omnium
bonorum, not only were all the liabilities of the partnership the
liabilities of the several partners, but the whole of the
property of each partner was brought into the common stock and
was enjoyed as a common fund. No such arrangement as this is
known in the modern world as the result of ordinary agreement,
though in some countries it may be the effect of marriage. It
appears to me that we are carried back to the joint brotherhoods
of primitive society, and that their development must have given
rise to the contract before us. Let us turn again to the contract
of Mandatum or Agency. The only complete representation of one
man by another which the Roman law allowed was the representation
of the Paterfamilias by the son or slave under his power. The
representation of the Principal by the Agent is much more
incomplete, and it seems to me probable that we have in it a
shadow of that thorough coalescence between two individuals which
was only possible anciently when they belonged to the same
family.
    The institutions which I have taken as my examples are
institutions of indigenous growth, developed probably more or
less within all ancient societies by the expansion of the notion
of kinship. But it sometimes happens that a wholly foreign
institution is introduced from without into a society based upon
assumed consanguinity, and then it is most instructive to observe
how closely, in such a case, material which antecedently we
should think likely to oppose the most stubborn resistance to the
infiltration of tribal ideas assimilates itself nevertheless to
the model of a Family or Tribe. You may be aware that the ancient
Irish Church has long been a puzzle to ecclesiastical historians.
There are difficulties suggested by it on which I do not pretend
to throw any new light, nor, indeed, could they conveniently be
considered here. Among perplexities of this class are the
extraordinary multiplication of bishops and their dependence,
apparently an almost servile dependence, on the religious houses
to which they were attached. But the relation of the various
ecclesiastical bodies to one another was undoubtedly of the
nature of tribal relation. The Brehon law seems to me fully to
confirm the account of the matter given, from the purely
ecclesiastical literature, by Dr Todd, in the Introduction to his
Life of St Patrick. One of the great Irish or Scotic
Missionaries, who afterwards nearly invariably reappears as a
Saint, obtains a grant of lands from some chieftain or tribe in
Ireland or Celtic Britain, and founds a monastery there, or it
may be that the founder of the religious house is already himself
the chieftain of a tribe. The House becomes the parent of others,
which again may in their turn throw out minor religious
establishments, at once monastic and missionary. The words
signifying 'family' or 'tribe' and 'kinship' are applied to all
the religious bodies created by this process. Each monastic
house, with its monks and bishops, constitutes a 'family' or
'tribe;' and its secular or servile dependants appear to be
sometimes included under the name. The same appellation is given
to the collective assemblage of religious houses formed by the
parent monastery and the various churches or monastic bodies
sprung from it. These make up together the 'tribe of the saint,'
but this last expression is not exclusively employed with this
particular meaning. The abbot of the parent house and all the
abbots of the minor houses are the 'comharbas' or co-heirs of the
saint, and in yet another sense the 'family' or 'tribe' of the
saint means his actual tribesmen or blood-relatives. Iona, or Hy,
was, as you know, the famous religious house founded by St
Columba near the coast of the newer Scotia. 'The Abbot of Hy',
says Dr Todd, 'or Co-arb of Columba, was the common head of
Durrow, Kells, Swords, Drumcliff, and other houses in Ireland
founded by Columba, as well as of the parent monastery of Hy, and
the "family of Colum-kille" was composed of the congregations or
inmates and dependants of all those monasteries. The families,
therefore, of such monasteries as Clomacnois or Durrow might
muster a very respectable body of fighting men.' Let me add, that
there is very good evidence that these 'families of the saints'
were occasionally engaged in sanguinary little wars. But, 'in
general' (I now quote again from Dr Todd), 'the "family" meant
only the monks or religious of the house.'
    It will be obvious to you that this application of the same
name to all these complicated sets of relations is every now and
then extremely perplexing, but the key to the difficulty is the
conception of the kindred branching off in successive generations
from the common stock, planting themselves occasionally at a
distance, but never altogether breaking the bond which connected
them with their original family and chief. Nothing, let me
observe, can be more curious than the way in which, throughout
these artificial structures, the original natural principle upon
which they were modelled struggles to assert itself at the
expense of the imitative system. In all the more modern guilds,
membership always tended to become hereditary, and here we have
the Brehon law striving to secure a preference, in elections to
the Abbacy, to the actual blood-relatives of the sainted founder.
The ecclesiastical rule, we know, required election by the monks,
but the Corus Bescna declares that, on a vacancy, the 'family of
the saint' (which here means the founder's sept), if there be a
qualified monk among them, ought to be preferred in elections to
the Abbacy -- 'though there be but a psalm-singer of them, if he
be fit, he shall have it.' And it proceeds to say that, if no
relative or tribesman of the saint be qualified, the Abbacy shall
go to some member of the tribe which originally granted the land.
    A very modern example of this plasticity of the notion of
kinship has recently been brought to my notice. The co-villagers
of an Indian village call themselves brothers, although, as I
have frequently observed, the composition of the community is
often artificial and its origin very miscellaneous. The
appellation, at the same time, is distinctly more than a mere
word. Now, some of the Christian missionaries have recently tried
an experiment which promises to have much success, and have
planted in villages converts collected from all sorts of
different regions. Yet these persons, as I am informed, fall into
a 'brotherhood' quite as easily and talk the language and assume
the habits appropriate to it quite as naturally as if they and
their forefathers had been members from time immemorial of this
peculiarly Indian association, the village-community.
    There is, however, another set of phenomena which belong to
the same class, but which seem to me to have been much
misunderstood. When men, under the influence of the cast of
thought we are discussing, are placed in circumstances which
naturally breed affection and sympathy, or when they are placed
in a relation which they are taught to consider especially
sacred, not only their words and ideas but their feelings,
emotions, and prejudices mould themselves on the pattern of those
which naturally result from consanguinity. We have, I believe, a
striking example of the process in the history of the Christian
Church. You know, I dare say, that Spiritual Relationship or the
tie between a sponsor and a baptized person, or between Sponsors,
or even between the sponsors and the family of the baptized,
became by degrees the source of a great number of prohibitions
against intermarriage, which stood on the same level with those
based on affinity, and almost with those founded on
consanguinity. The earliest evidence we have that this order of
ideas was stirring the Christian community is, I believe, a
Constitution of Justinian in the Code (v. 4. 26), which forbids
the marriage of the sponsor with the baptized; but the
prohibitions were rapidly extended by the various authorities
which contributed to the Canon law, and were finally regulated
and somewhat narrowed by the Council of Trent. Nowadays, I am
told that they merely survive formally in the Roman Catholic
Church, and that dispensations relaxing them are obtainable as of
course. The explanation of the system by technical theologians is
that it is based on the wish to give a peculiar sacredness to the
bond created by sponsorship, and this I believe to be a true
account of its origin. But I do not believe that Spiritual
Relationship, a structure based on contract, would in every stage
of thought have assimilated itself to natural relationship. The
system developed itself just when Christianity was being diffused
among races whose social organisation was founded on kinship, and
I cannot but think that their ideas reacted on the Church. With
such races a very sacred tie was necessarily of the nature of a
family tie, and carried with it the same associations and the
same order of feeling. I do not, therefore, consider that such
terms as Gossipred, Godfather, Godson -- to which there are
counterparts in several languages -- were created by the theory
of Spiritual Relationship, but rather that they mark the process
by which that theory was formed.
    It seems to me accordingly in the highest degree natural that
Spiritual Relationship, when introduced into a tribal society
like that of the ancient Irish, should closely assimilate itself
to blood-relationship. We know in fact that it did so, and that
the stringency of the relation and the warmth of the affections
which it produced moved the scorn, the wrath, and the
astonishment of several generations of English observers,
deriving their ideas from a social order now become very unlike
that of Ireland. But by the side of Gossipred, or Spiritual
Relationship, there stood another much more primitive
institution, which was extraordinarily developed among the
ancient Irish, though not at all peculiar to them. This was
Fosterage, the giving and taking of children for nurture. Of the
reasons why this practice, now known to have been widely diffused
among Aryan communities, should have had an exceptional
importance and popularity in ireland, we can say little more than
that they probably belong to the accidents of Irish history and
of Irish social life. But of the fact there is no doubt. An
entire sub-tract in the Senchus Mor is devoted to the Law of
Fosterage, and sets out with the greatest minuteness the rights
and duties attaching to all parties when the children of another
family were received for nurture and education. It is classed,
with Gossipred, as one of the anomalies or curses of Ireland by
all her English critics, from Giraldus Cambrensis in the twelfth
century to Spenser in the sixteenth. It seemed to them monstrous
that the same mother's milk should produce in Ireland the same
close affections as did common paternity in their own country.
The true explanation was one which is only now dawning On us. It
was, that Fosterage was an institution which, though artificial
in its commencements, was natural in its operations; and that the
relation of foster-parent and foster-child tended, in that stage
of feeling, to become indistinguishable from the relation of
father and son.
    The form of Fosterage which has most interest for the modern
enquirer is called by the Translators of the Brehon tracts
Literary Fosterage. It was an institution nearly connected with
the existence of the Brehon Law Schools, and it consists of the
various relations established between the Brehon teacher and the
pupils he received into his house for instruction in the Brehon
lore. However it may surprise us that the connection between
Schoolmaster and Pupil was regarded as peculiarly sacred by the
ancient Irish, and as closely resembling natural fatherhood, the
Brehon tracts leave no room for doubt on the point. It is
expressly laid down that it created the same Patria Potestas as
actual paternity; and the literary fosterfather, though he
teaches gratuitously, has a claim through life upon portions of
the property of the literary foster-son. Thus the Brehon with his
pupils constituted not a school in our sense but a true family.
While the ordinary foster-father was bound by the law to give
education of some kind to his foster-children -- to the sons of
chiefs instructions in riding, shooting with the bow, swimming,
and chess-playing, and instruction to their daughters in sewing,
cutting out, and embroidery -- the Brehon trained his foster-sons
in learning of the highest dignity, the lore of the chief
literary profession. He took payment, but it was the law which
settled it for him. It was part of his status, and not the result
of a bargain.
    There are some faint traces of Fosterage in the Hindoo law,
but substantially it has dropped out of the system. The vestiges
of Literary Fosterage are, however, tolerably abundant and very
plain. According to the general custom of India, the Brahmin
teacher of Brahmin pupils receives no payment for his services,
but the Hindoo law repeatedly reserves to him a remote succession
to their property. In each of four Brahminical law-tracts of
great authority, the Vyavahara Mayukha, the Daya-Bhaga, the
Mitakshara, and the Daya-Krama-Sangraha, the same ancient text is
quoted (sometimes but not always attributed to Manu), which is to
the effect that 'If there be no male issue the nearest kinsman
inherits; or in default of kindred, the preceptor, or failing him
the disciple.' One commentator explains that the preceptor is the
instructor in the Vedas, and another describes him as the person
who affords religious instruction to his pupil after investing
him with the Brahminical thread. These writers add that if
neither teacher nor pupil have survived the deceased his
fellow-student will succeed. Modern cases turning on these
peculiar rules of succession may be found in the Anglo-Indian Law
Reports.
    We are thus brought face to face with a problem which
possesses interest in proportion to its difficulty -- the problem
of the origin of Castes. I cannot profess to do more than
approach it, but the opportunity of throwing even the least light
on a subject so dark ought not to be neglected. First let me say
that, among the comparatively few English writers who have
noticed the Brehon lawyers, some have loosely described them as a
caste. But this is an improper use of the word, though it is one
not uncommon in India. As regards the position of the Brehons in
very early times, the evidence of the Irish records is consistent
with the testimony of Caesar as to the literary class of the
Gallic Celts, and seems to show that anyone who went through a
particular training might become a Brehon. When, however, Ireland
began to be examined by English observers, it is plain that the
art and knowledge of the Brehon had become hereditary in certain
families who were attached to or dependent on the Chiefs of
particular tribes. There is nothing remarkable in this change,
which has obviously occurred with a vast number of trades and
professions in India, now popularly called castes. In societies
of an archaic type, a particular craft or kind of knowledge
becomes in time an hereditary profession of families, almost as a
matter of course. The difficulty with a native of India,
unsophisticated by English ideas, is not to find a reason why a
son should succeed to the learning of his father, and
consequently to his office and duties; his difficulty would
rather be to explain to himself why it should not be so, and how
the public interests could be consulted by any other arrangement.
The States governed by native Indian Princes are becoming a good
deal Anglicised, but still in them it is the practically
universal rule that office is hereditary. We do not, however,
thus arrive at a complete account of the growth of those castes
which are definite sections of great populations one only of
these castes really survives in India, that of the Brahmins, and
it is strongly suspected that the whole literary theory of Caste,
which is of Brahmin origin, is based on the existence of the
Brahmin caste atone. Now, the tendency of knowledge to become
hereditary is, by itself, consistent with a great variety of
religious and literary cultivation; but, as a fact, the Brahmins
of India are a remarkably homogeneous class, admitting (though no
doubt with considerable local qualifications) a general
brotherhood of all members of the order.
    While, then, I cannot say that our scanty information
respecting changes in the status of the Brehon lawyers helps us
much towards a comprehension of the beginnings of Caste in the
true sense, I certainly think that we learn something more than
we knew before from the references in the Brehon tracts to
Literary Fosterage. They appear to me to give a new emphasis and
point to the rules of Hindoo Law respecting the remote succession
of the 'spiritual preceptor' to the property of families. It
seems as if in the most ancient state of both systems Literary or
Religious fatherhood had been closely assimilated to actual
fatherhood. Under these circumstances, if great schools of Vedaic
learning existed in India in very ancient times, as we have
strong reason to think they did, the relation between Teacher and
Pupil would closely follow and imitate the relation between
father and son. A great profession would thus be formed, with
stores of common knowledge; but the tie between the members would
not be purely intellectual; it would from the first be conceived
as of the nature of kinship. Such a system, as the old ideas
decayed, would tend infallibly to become one of real
consanguinity. The aptitude for sacred know ledge would come to
be thought to run in the blood of sons whose fathers had been
instructed in it, and none but such sons would be received into
the schools. A Caste would thus be formed, in the eyes of its
members the type of all Castes.
    We have thus strong reason for thinking that societies still
under the influence of primitive thought labour under a certain
incapacity for regarding men, grouped together by virtue of any
institutions whatsoever, as connected otherwise than through
blood-relationship. We find that, through this barrenness of
conception, they are apt to extend the notion of consanguinity
and the language beginning in it to institutions of their own not
really founded on community of blood, and even to institutions of
foreign origin. We find also that the association between
institutions arising from true kinship and institutions based on
artificial kinship is sometimes so strong, that the emotions
which they respectively call forth are practically
indistinguishable. These phenomena of early thought and feeling
appear to me amply to account for some facts of Irish history
which nearly all English writers on Ireland have noticed with
extreme surprise or indignation. The expressions of Sir John
Davis, while stating that many of the early Anglo-Norman
adventurers settled in Ireland became in time pure Irish
chieftains, reflect the violent astonishment and anger which the
transformation excited in Englishmen. 'The English Colonists did
embrace and use the Irish custom, after they had rejected the
Civil and Honourable Laws and Customs of England, whereby they
became degenerate and metamorphosed like Nebuchadnezzar, who,
although he had the face of a man, had the heart of a beast; or
like those who had drunk of Circe's cup and were turned into very
beasts, and yet took such pleasure in their beastly manner of
life as they would not return to their shape of men again;
insomuch as within less time than the age of a man, they had no
marks or difference left among them of that noble nation from
which they were descended.' The fact, stated in this bitter
language, is not especially marvellous. We have seen the general
complexion of Irish society giving its colour to institutions of
all sorts -- associations of kinsmen shading off into assemblages
of partners and guild-brothers -- foster parentage, spiritual
parentage, and preceptorship taking their hue from natural
paternity -- ecclesiastical organisation blending with tribal
organisation. The Anglo-Norman captain who had thought to conquer
for himself an Irish signory passed insensibly in the same way
into the chieftain of an Irish tribe. The dependants who
surrounded him did not possibly draw any clear distinction
between the actual depositary of power and the natural depositary
of power, and, as the contagiousness of ideas is in proportion to
their fewness, it is intelligible that he too was affected by the
mental atmosphere in which he lived. Nor were other motives
wanting. The extreme poverty and constant distractions of Ireland
did not prevent an extraordinary amount of the pride of
authority, of the pride of birth, and even of the pride of wealth
from centring in the dignity of an Irish Chief.


