


Lecture IV







The Tribe and the Land







    It has been very commonly believed that, before the agrarian



measures of James the First, Ireland was one of the countries in



which private property in land was invested with least



sacredness, and in which forms of ownership generally considered



as barbarous most extensively prevailed. Spenser and Davis



certainly suggest this opinion, and several modern writers have



adopted it. The Brehon law-tracts prove, however, that it can



only be received with considerable qualification and



modification, and they show that private property, and especially



private property in land, had long been known in Ireland at the



epoch to which they belong, having come into existence either



through the natural disintegration of collective ownership or



through the severance of particular estates from the general



tribal domain. Nevertheless it cannot, I think, be doubted that



at the period to which the tracts are an index much land was held



throughout Ireland under rules or customs savouring of the



ancient collective enjoyment, and this I understand Dr Sullivan



to allow. (Introduction, p. cxliv)



    Part of the evidence of the fact just stated is tolerably



familiar to students of Irish history. At the beginning of the



seventeenth century the Anglo-Irish Judges declared the English



Common Law to be in force throughout Ireland, and from the date



of this decision all land in the country descended to the eldest



son of the last owner, unless its devolution was otherwise



determined by settlement or will. In Sir John Davis's report of



the case and of the arguments before the Court, it is recited



that hitherto all land in Ireland had descended either under the



rule of Tanistry or under the rules of Gavelkind. The system of



inheritance here called Gavelkind is thus described: When a



landowning member of an Irish Sept died, its chief made a



re-distribution of all the lands of the Sept. He did not divide



the estate of the dead man among his children, but used it to



increase the allotments of the various households of which the



Sept was made up. The Judges treated both Tanistry and Gavelkind



as systems of succession after death, of a peculiarly barbarous



and mischievous kind; and, as systems of succession, I shall



consider them hereafter. But all systems of succession after



death bear a close relation to ancient modes of enjoyment during



life; for instance, in the Joint Undivided Family of the Hindoos,



the stirpes, or stocks, which are only known to European law as



branches of inheritors, are actual divisions of the family, and



live together in distinct parts of the common dwelling.



('Calcutta Review' July 1874, p. 208) The so-called Irish



Gavelkind belongs to a class of institutions very common in the



infancy of law; it is a contrivance for securing comparative



equality among the joint proprietors of a common fund. The



redistribution here takes place at the death of a head of a



household; but if equality were secured by what is practically



the same process -- viz., re-division after a fixed period of



years -- an institution would be produced which has not quite



died out of Europe at the present moment, and of which there are



traditions in all old countries. At the same time i have no doubt



that, when the Irish Gavelkind was declared illegal, it was very



far from being the only system of succession known to Ireland



except Tanistry, and i th ink it probable that many different



modes of enjoyment and inheritance were abolished by the decision



giving the land to the eldest son.



    It was the actual observation of peculiar agricultural



usages, special methods of cultivation, and abnormal rules of



tenure, which mainly enabled G. L. Von Maurer to restore the



German Mark to knowledge; and it was by using Von Maurer's



results as his key that Nasse was able to decipher the scattered



references to the 'Agricultural Community of the Middle Ages' in



a variety of English documents. I venture to think that this



class of observation has not been carried far enough in Ireland



to yield material for a confident opinion, but there certainly



seem to be vestiges of ancient collective enjoyment in the



extensive prevalence of 'rundale' holdings in parts of the



country. Under this system a definite area of land is occupied by



a group of families. In the form now most common, the arable



lands are held in severalty, while pasture and bog are in common.



But as lately as fifty years since, cases were frequent in which



the arable land was divided into farms which shifted among the



tenant-families periodically, and sometimes annually. Even when



no such division was made, a well-known relic of the Mark-system,



as it showed itself in Germany and England, was occasionally



found : the arable portion of the estates was composed of three



different qualities of soil, and each tenant had a lot or lots in



the land of each quality, without reference to position. What was



virtually the same system of tenure prevailed quite recently in



the Scottish Highlands. I have ascertained that the families



which formed the village-communities only just extinct in the



Western Highlands had the lands of the village re-distributed



among them by lot at fixed intervals of time; and I gather from



Mr Skene's valuable note on 'Tribe Communities in Scotland'



(appended to the second volume of his edition of Fordun's



Chronicle), that he believes this system of re-division to have



been once universal, or at least widely extended, among the



Scottish Celts.



    It is to be observed that (so far as I am able to learn) the



Irish holdings in 'rundale' are not forms of property, but modes



of occupation. There is always some person above who is legally



owner of all the land held by the group of families, and who,



theoretically, could change the method of holding, although,



practically, popular feeling would put the greatest difficulties



in his way. We must bear in mind, however, that archaic kinds of



tenancy are constantly evidence of ancient forms of



proprietorship. This is so in countries in which superior



ownership has arisen through the natural course of events through



purchase from small allodial proprietors, through colonisation of



village waste-lands become in time the lord's waste, or (in an



earlier state of society) through the sinking of whole



communities of peasants into villeinage, and through a consequent



transformation of the legal theory of their rights. But all this



process of change would be gravely misconstrued if it were



supposed that, because a Chief or Lord had come to be recognised



as legal owner of the whole tribal domain, or of great portions



of it, he therefore altered the accustomed methods of occupation



and cultivation, or (as some would even seem to think) he began



at once to regard the occupying peasantry as modern lessees or



modern tenants at will. No doubt the ancient type of ownership



long served as the model for tenancy; and the common holdings,



dying out as property, survived as occupation. And, if this were



the case in other countries, much more would it be so in Ireland,



where property has changed hands so often and so violently; where



during whole centuries, the owners of land neither regarded, nor



were in a position to regard, the occupiers save as payers of



rent and dues; and where the conception of a landlord acting on



his legal ownership with a view to improvement and increase of



production is altogether modern.



    The chief Brehon law-tract, which sets forth the mutual



rights of the collective tribe and of individual tribesmen or



households of tribesmen in respect of tribal property, is called



the Corus Bescna, and is printed in the Third Volume of the



official edition. It presents great difficulties. I quite agree



with the Editors that the commentary and glosses constantly



contradict and obscure the text, either because the commentators



did not understand it or because they belonged to a later period



and a different stage of legal relations. But the most serious



doubt which occurs to the student of the text arises from the



strong and palpable bias of the compiler towards the interests of



the Church; indeed, part of the tract is avowedly devoted to the



law of Church property and of the organisation of religious



houses. When this writer affirms that, under certain



circumstances, a tribesman may grant or contract away tribal



land, his ecclesiastical leaning constantly suggests a doubt as



to his legal doctrine. Does he mean to lay down that the land may



be parted with generally and in favour of anybody, or only that



it may be alienated in favour of the Church? This difficulty of



construction has an interest of its own. I am myself persuaded



that the influence of the Christian Church on law has been very



generally sought for in a wrong quarter, and that historians of



law have too much overlooked its share in diffusing the



conceptions of free contract, individual property, and



testamentary succession, through the regions beyond the Roman



Empire which were peopled by communities held together by the



primitive tie of consanguinity. It is generally agreed among



scholars that Churchmen introduced these races to wills and



bequests; the Brehon tracts suggest to me at least that, along



with the sacredness of bequests, they insisted upon the



sacredness of contracts; and it is well known that, in the



Germanic countries, their ecclesiastical societies were among the



earliest and largest grantees of public or 'folk' land (Stubbs,



'Constitutional History ', vol. i. p. 154). The Will, the



Contract, and the Separate Ownership were in fact indispensable



to the Church as the donee of pious gifts; and they were also



essential and characteristic elements in the civilisation amid



which the Church had been reared to maturity. It is possible that



the compiler of the Corus Bescna may have been an ecclesiastic,



as he certainly would have been in any society except the Irish;



but, if he were a lawyer, he writes aS a lawyer would state the



case on behalf of a favourite and important client. Let me add



that all the Brehon writers seem to me to have a bias towards



private or several, as distinguished from collective, property.



No doubt it was then, as always, the great source of legal



business, and it may have seemed to them, and it possibly was,



the index to such advance in civilisation as their country was



capable of making.



    My own strong opinion is that the 'Fine,' whose rights and



powers are the principal theme of the Corus Bescna, and whose



name the translators render 'Tribe,' is neither the Tribe in its



largest extension, nor, on the other hand, the modern Family or



group of descendants from a living ancestor, but the Sept. It is



a body of kinsmen whose progenitor is no longer living, but whose



descent from him is a reality, and neither a myth nor a fiction.



It is the Joint Family of the Hindoos, but with the



characteristics of that group considerably modified through



settlement on the land. This peculiar assemblage or corporation



of blood-relatives, which has been referred to by me several



times before, is formed by the continuance of the family union



through several, and it may be through an indefinite number of



generations. The rule throughout most of the civilised world is



that, for all purposes of law, families are broken up into



individuals or dissolved into a number of new families by the



death of their head. But this is not necessary the case. The



group made up of those whom we vaguely call our relatives -- of



our brothers, nephews, great-uncles, uncles, and cousins, no less



than those related to us in the ascending and descending lines --



might very well, after any number of deaths, remain knitted



together not only by blood and affection, but by mutual rights



and duties prescribed or sanctioned by the law. An association of



this sort is well known to the law of India as the Joint



Undivided Family, or, to give the technical description, the



Family, 'joint in food, worship, and estate.' If a Hindoo has



become the root of a family it is not necessarily separated by



his death; his children continue united for legal purposes as a



corporate brotherhood, and some definite act of one or more of



the brethren is required to effect a dissolution of the plexus of



mutual rights and a partition of the family property. The family



thus formed by the continuance of several generations in union is



identical in outline with a group very familiar to the students



of the older Roman law -- the Agnatic Kindred. The Agnates were



that assemblage of persons who would have been under the



patriarchal authority of some common ancestor, if he had lived



long enough to exercise it. The Joint Family of the Hindoos is



that assemblage of persons who would have joined in the



sacrifices at the funeral of some common ancestor, if he had died



in their lifetime. In the last case the sacerdotal point of view



merely takes the place of the legal or civil.



    So far as we are able, amid the disadvantages under which we



are placed by the obscurity of our authorities, let us examine



the legal qualities which the ancient Irish law attributes to



this brotherhood of kinsmen as it was found in Ireland. First of



all, the 'Tribe' of the Brehon tracts is a corporate, organic,



self-sustaining unit. 'The Tribe sustains itself.' ('Ancient Laws



of Ireland,' ii. 283.) Its continuity has begun to depend on the



land which it occupies -- 'land,' says one of the still



unpublished tracts, 'is perpetual man' -- but it is not a purely



land-owning body; it has 'live chattels and dead chattels,'



distinguished from those of individual tribesmen. ('Ancient Laws



of Ireland,' ii. 289.) Nor is it a purely cultivating body; it



may follow a professional calling. (Ibid., iii. 49-51.) A portion



of the tribal domain, probably the arable and choice pasture



lands, has been allotted to separate households of tribesmen, but



they hold their allotments subject to the controlling rights of



the entire brotherhood, and the primary or fundamental rule is



that they are to keep their shares of tribe-land intact. 'Every



tribesman is able to keep his tribe-land; he is not to sell it or



alienate or conceal it, or give it to pay for crimes or



contracts.' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' ii. 283.) 'No person



should leave a rent upon his land or upon his tribe which he did



not find upon it.' (Ibid., iii. 52, 53.) 'Everyone is wealthy who



keeps his tribe-land perfect as he got it, who does not leave



greater debt upon it than he found on it.' (Ibid., iii. 55.)



    Under certain circumstances the tribesman may alienate, by



grant, contract, or bequest, a certain quantity of the tribe-land



allotted to him; but what are the circumstances, and what the



quantity, are points on which we cannot venture to make any



precise statement, so obscure and contradictory are the rules set



forth. But the grantee primarily contemplated is certainly the



Church, though it seems clear that there is a general power of



alienation, either with the consent of the entire tribal



brotherhood or under pressure of strong necessity. It further



appears to be beyond question that the tribesman has considerably



greater power of disposition over property which he has acquired



than over property which has devolved on him as a member of a



tribe, and that he has more power over acquisitions made by his



own unaided industry than over acquisitions made through profits



arising from the cultivation of tribal land. 'No person should



grant land except such as he has purchased himself, unless by the



common consent of the tribe. ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' iii. 52,



53.) 'He who has not sold or bought (i.e., he who keeps his



tribeland as he obtained it) is allowed to make grants, each



according to his dignity (i.e., as the commentator explains, to



the extent of one-third or one-half of his tribe-land).' 'He who



neither sells nor purchases may give as far as the third of his



tribe-share in case of little necessity and one-half in case of



great necessity' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,'iii. 47.) 'If it be



land that acquires it, it is one-half;... if he be a professional



man, it is two-thirds of his contracts ' (iii. 49).



    The distinction between acquired property and property



inherited or received from kinsmen, and the enlarged power of



parting with the first, are found in many bodies of ancient law



-- in our own early law among others. The rule that alienations,



otherwise unlawful, may be made under pressure of necessity, is



found in many parts of Hindoo law. The rule requiring the consent



of the collective brotherhood to alienations, with many minor



rules of this part of Brehon law, constantly forms part of the



customs of Indian and Russian village-communities; and the duty



of following common practices of tillage, which is the bequest



from these communities which lasted longest in the Germanic



countries, is classed by the Corus Bescna, along with Marriage,



as one of the fundamental institutions of the irish people.



('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' iii. 17.) But much the most striking



and unexpected analogies in the Brehon law on the subject of



Tribesmen and the Tribe are those which it has with the Hindoo



law of Joint Undivided Families. Under the Brahminical Indian



law, whenever a member of a joint family has acquired property



through special scientific knowledge or the practice of a liberal



art, he does not bring it into the common fund, unless his



accomplishments were obtained through a training given to him by



his family or at their expense. The whole law on the subject was



much considered in a strange case which arose before the High



Court of Madras ('Madras High Court Reports,' ii. 56), where a



joint family claimed the gains of a dancing-girl. The decision of



the Court is thus summarised by the Reporter: 'The ordinary gains



of science are divisible (i.e., they are brought into hotchpot



upon partition of an undivided estate), when such science has



been imparted at the family expense and acquired while receiving



a family maintenance. It is otherwise when the science has been



imparted at the expense of persons not members of the learner's



family.' The very counterparts of the Indian rule and of the



Indian exception are found in the ancient Irish law. 'If (the



tribesman) be a professional man-that is, if the property be



acquired by judicature or poetry, or any profession whatsoever --



he is capable of giving two-thirds of it to the Church... but, if



it was the lawful profession of his tribe, he shall not give of



the emolument of his profession but just as he could give of the



land of his tribe.' (Corus Bescna, 'Ancient Laws of Ireland,'



iii. 5.) It will be seen from the instances which I have given



that the rules of the Irish Brehon law regulating the power of



individual tribesmen to alienate their separate property answer



to the rules of Indian Brahminical law which regulate the power



of individual members of a joint family to enjoy separate



property. The difference is material. The Hindoo law assumes that



collective enjoyment by the whole brotherhood is the rule, and it



treats the enjoyment of separate property by individual brethren



as an exception -- an exception, I may add, round which an



enormous mass of law has now clustered. On the other hand, the



Brehon law, so far as it can be understood, seems to me



reconcileable with no other assumption than that individual



proprietary rights have grown up and attained some stability



within the circle of the tribe. The exercise of these rights is



at the same time limited by the controlling powers of the



collective brotherhood of tribesmen; and to these last, as to the



Agnatic Kindred at Rome, some ultimate right of succession



appears to be reserved. Hence the Irish legal unit is not



precisely a Joint Family; if the Brehon law is to be trusted, it



has considerably less of the 'natural communism' which



characterises the Indian institution. The 'Fine' of the tracts is



constantly spoken of in connection with landed property, and,



whenever it is so connected, I imagine it to have undergone some



of the changes which are constantly brought about by contact with



the land, and I figure it to myself in that case as a Mark or



Village-Community, in which the ideas proper to the older group



out of which it grew, the Joint Family, have survived in



exceptional strength It in this respect approaches the Russian



rather than the Indian type of village-community.



    The 'Judgments of Co-Tenancy' is a Brehon law-tract, still



unpublished at the time at which I write, and presenting, in its



present state, considerable difficulties of interpretation. It



puts, at the outset, the question, -- 'Whence does Co-Tenancy



arise?' The answer given is, 'From several heirs and from their



increasing on the land.' The tract then goes on to explain that



the land is, in the first year, to be tilled by the kinsmen just



as each pleases; that in the second year they are to exchange



lots; that in the third year the boundaries are to be fixed; and



that the whole process of severance is to be consummated in the



tenth year. I trust it is not a presumptuous conjecture that the



order of change here indicated is more trustworthy than the time



fixed for each of its stages. The period of ten years for the



entire transition from collective to separate property seems to



me greatly too short, and hard to reconcile with other Irish



evidence; and I suggest that the Brehon lawyer, attached to the



institution of separate property, like the rest of his class, is



depicting rather an ideal than an actual set of arrangements. The



process, however, which is here described, if it be spread over a



much longer space of time, is really in harmony with all our



knowledge of the rise and progress of cultivating communities.



First a Joint Family, composed of 'several heirs increasing on



the land,' is found to have made a settlement. In the earliest



stage the various households reclaim the land without set rule.



Next comes the system of exchanging lots. Finally, the portions



of land are enjoyed in severalty.



    The references to the ancient collective ownership and



ancient collective enjoyment in the non-legal Irish literature



appear to be very rare. But my friend Mr Whitley Stokes has



supplied me with two passages in point. The 'Liber Hymnorum,'



attributed to the eleventh century, contains (folio 5A) the



following statement: 'Numerous were the human beings in Ireland



at that time (i.e. the time of the sons of Aed Slane, A.D.



658-694), and such was their number that they used to get only



thrice nine ridges for each man in Ireland, to wit, nine of bog,



and nine of smooth (arable), and nine of wood.' Another Irish



manuscript, believed to date from the twelfth century, the 'Lebor



na Huidre,' Says that 'there was not ditch, nor fence, nor



stone-wall round land, till came the period of the sons of Aed



Slane, but (only) smooth fields. Because of the abundance of the



households in their period, therefore it is that they introduced



boundaries in Ireland. These curious statements can, of course,



only be regarded as authority for the existence, at the time when



they were penned, of a belief that a change from a system of



collective to a system of restricted enjoyment had occurred at



some period or other in Ireland, and of a tradition respecting



the date of the change. But it is instructive to find both of



them attributing it to the growth of population, and an especial



interest attaches to the account given in the 'Liber Hymnorum' of



the newer distribution of land which was thought to have taken



the place of something older. The periodical allotment to each



household of a definite portion of bog land, wood land, and



arable land wears a strong resemblance to the apportionment of



pasture and wood and arable land which still goes on in our day



under the communal rules of the Swiss Allmenden (see Laveleye,



'P. et s. F. P.,' pp. 268 et seq.), and which is an undoubted



legacy from the ancient constitution of certain Swiss Cantons as



Teutonic Hundreds.



    Property in Land, wherever it has grown out of the gradual



dissolution of the ancient cultivating communities, has many



characteristics which distinguish it from the form of landed



property with which Englishmen and men of English race are best



acquainted. The area within which this last form of property is



the sole or dominant kind of ownership is now much larger than it



was, through its diffusion over all North America, except Mexico,



and over all colonies settled for the first time by Englishmen,



but our nearly exclusive familiarity with it has led, I think, to



our very commonly over-estimating the extent to which it prevails



over the world, and even over Western Europe. Its parentage may



be traced, not to the decaying authority of the Tribe over the



severalties of the tribesmen, but to the ever-increasing



authority of the Chief, first over his own domain and 'booked'



land, and secondarily over the tribe-lands. The early growth of



the power of the Chief is thus of the utmost interest in the



history of landed property, and I propose to discuss it at some



length in the sUCceeding Lectures. Meantime, let me say something



on the transmutations which Patriarchal Power is observed, as a



fact, to undergo in the assemblies of men held together by



kinship which are still found making a part of Aryan communities.



    The Joint Undivided Family, wherever its beginning is seen in



such communities, springs universally out of the Patriarchal



Family, a group of natural or adoptive descendants held together



by subjection to the eldest living ascendant, father,



grandfather, or great-grandfather. Whatever be the formal



prescriptions of the law, the head of such a group is always in



practice despotic, and he is the object of a respect, if not



always of an affection, which is probably seated deeper than any



positive institution. But in the more extensive assemblages of



kinsmen which constitute the Joint Family the eldest male of the



eldest line is never the parent of all the members, and not



necessarily the first in age among them. To many of them he is



merely a distant relative, and he may possibly be an infant. The



sense of patriarchal right does not die out in such groups. Each



father or grandfather has more power than anybody else over his



wife, children, and descendants; and there is always what may be



called a belief that the blood of the collective brotherhood runs



more truly and purely in some one line than in any other. Among



the Hindoos, the eldest male of this line, if of full mental



capacity, is gene rally placed at the head of the concerns of the



joint family; but where the institution survives in any



completeness, he is not a Paterfamilias, nor is he owner of the



family property, but merely manager of its affairs and



administrator of its possessions. If he is not deemed fit for his



duties, a 'worthier' kinsman is substituted for him by election,



and, in fact, the longer the joint family holds together, the



more election gains ground at the expense of birth. The head or



manager of the Sclavonic House-Communities (which, however, are



much more artificial than the Hindoo Joint Families) is



undisguisedly an elective representative, and in some of our



examples a council of kinsmen belonging to the eldest line of



descent takes the place of an individual administrator. The whole



process I will describe as the gradual transmutation of the



Patriarch into the Chief. The general rule is that the Chief is



elected, with a strong preference for the eldest line. Sometimes



he is assisted by a definite council of near kinsmen, and



sometimes this council takes his place. On the whole, where the



body of kinsmen formed on the type of the Joint Family is a



purely civil institution, the tendency is towards greater



disregard of the claims of blood. But in those states of society



in which the brotherhood is not merely a civil confraternity, but



a political, militant, self-sustaining group, we can perceive



from actually extant examples that a separate set of causes come



into operation, and that the Chief, as military leader, sometimes



more than regains the privileges which he lost through the decay



of the tradition which connected him with the common root of all



the kindred. True patriarchal authority, however, revives



whenever the process of expansion into a group is interrupted and



whenever one of the brotherhood plants himself at a distance from



the rest. A Hindoo who severs himself from a Joint Family, which



the law as administered by the English tribunals gives him great



facilities for doing, acquires much greater power over his



family, in our sense of the word, than he had as a member of the



larger brotherhood. Similarly, in the developed Joint Family or



Village-Community, as the little society becomes more populous,



as the village spreads, as the practice of living in separate



dwellings extends, as the land rather than the common lineage



gets to be regarded as the cement of the brotherhood, each man in



his own house practically obtains stringent patriarchal authority



over his wife, children, and servants. But then, on the other



hand, the separated member of the joint family, or the head of



the village household, will himself become the root of a new



joint brotherhood, unless his children voluntarily dissolve the



family union after his death. Thus all the branches of human



society may or may not have been developed from joint families



which arose out of an original patriarchal cell; but, wherever



the Joint Family is an institution of an Aryan race, we see it



springing from such a cell, and, when it dissolves, we see it



dissolving into a number of such cells.












