


Lecture 2



The Ancient Irish Law







    The great peculiarity of the ancient laws of Ireland, so far



as they are accessible to us, is discussed, with much instructive



illustration, in the General Preface to the Third Volume of the



official translations. They are not a legislative structure, but



the creation of a class of professional lawyers, the Brehons,



whose occupation became hereditary, and who on that ground have



been designated, though not with strict accuracy, a caste. This



view, which is consistent with all that early English authorities



on Ireland have told us of the system they call the Brehon law,



is certainly that which would be suggested by simple inspection



of the law tracts at present translated and published. The Book



of Aicill is probably the oldest, and its text is avowedly



composed of the dicta of two famous lawyers, Cormac and



Cennfeladh. The Senchus Mor does, indeed, profess to have been



produced by a process resembling legislation, but the pretension



cannot be supported; and, even if it could, the Senchus Mor would



not less consist of the opinions of famous Brehons. It describes



the legal rules embodied in its text as formed of the 'law of



nature', and of the 'law of the letter'. The 'law of the letter'



is the Scriptural law, extended by so much of Canon law as the



primitive monastic Church of Ireland can be supposed to have



created or adopted. The reference in the misleading phrase 'law



of nature', is not to be the memorable combination of words



familiar to the Roman lawyers, but to the text of St Paul in the



Epistle to the Romans: 'For when the Gentiles, which have not the



law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having



not the law, are the law unto themselves.' (Rom. ii. 14) The 'law



of nature' is, therefore, the ancient pre-Christian ingredient in



the system, and the 'Senchus Mor' says of it: 'The judgments of



true nature while the Holy Ghost had spoken through the mouths of



the Brehons and just poets of the men of Erin, from the first



occupation of Ireland down to the reception of the faith, were



all exhibited by Dubhthach to Patrick. What did not clash with



the Word of God in the written law and the New Testament and the



consciences of believers, was confirmed in the laws of the



Brehons by Patrick and by the ecclesiastics and chieftains of



Ireland; for the law of nature had been quite right except the



faith, and its obligations, and the harmony of the Church and



people. And this is the "Senchus Mor".'



    Dr Sullivan, on the other hand, whose learned and exhaustive



Introduction to O'Curry's Lectures forms the first volume of the



'Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish', affirms, on the



evidence of ancient records, that the institutions which in some



communities undoubtedly developed into true legislatures had



their counterparts in the Ireland to which the laws belonged, and



he does not hesitate to designate certain portions of the Irish



legal system 'statute-law'. In the present sate of criticism on



Irish documents it is not possible to hold the balance exactly



between the writers of the Introduction and of the General



Preface; but there is not the inconsistency between their



opinions which there might appear to be at first sight. In the



infancy of society many conceptions are found blended together



which are now distinct, and many associations which are now



inseparable from particular processes or institutions are not



found coupled with them. There is abundant proof that legislative



and judicial power are not distinguished in primitive thought;



nor, again, is legislation associated with innovation. In our day



the legislator is always supposed to innovate; the judge never.



But of old the legislator no more necessarily innovated than the



judge; he only, for the most part, declared pre-exiting law or



custom. It is impossible to determine how much new law there was



in the Laws of Solon, or in the Twelve Tables of Rome, or in the



Laws of Alfred and Canute, or in the Salic Law which is the



oldest of the so-called Leges Barbarorum, but in all probability



the quantity was extremely small. Thus, when a body of Brehon



judgments was promulgated by an Irish Chief to a tribal assembly,



it is probable than convenience was the object sought rather than



a new sanction. A remarkable poem, appended to O'Curry's



Lectures, tells us how certain Chiefs proceeded every third year



to the 'Fair of Carman' and there proclaimed 'the rights of every



law and the restraints'; but it does not at all follow that this



promulgation had any affinity for legislation in the modern



sense. The innovating legislatures of the modern world appear to



have grown up where certain conditions were present which were



viturally unknown to ancient Ireland -- where the primitive



groups of which society was formed were broken up with some



completeness, and where a central government was constituted



acting on individuals from a distance coercively and



irresistibly.



    There are, moreover, some independent reasons for thinking



that, among the Celtic races, the half-judicial,



half-legislative, power originally possessed by the tribal Chief,



or by the tribal Assembly, or by both in combination, passed very



early to a special class of learned persons. The Prefaces in



Irish found at the commencement of some of the law-tracts, which



are of much interest, but of uncertain origin and date, contain



several reference to the order in Celtic society which has



hitherto occupied men's thoughts more than any other, the Druids.



The word occurs in the Irish text. The writers of the prefaces



seem to have conceived the Druids as a class of heathen priests



who had once practised magical arts. The enchanters of Pharaoh



are, for instance, called the Egyptian Druids, in the Preface to



the Senchus Mor. The point of view seems to be the one familiar



enough to us in modern literature, where an exclusive prominence



is given to the priestly character of the Druids; nor do the



Brehon lawyers appear to connect themselves with a class of men



whom they regard as having belonged altogether to the old order



of the world. I am quite aware that, in asking whether the



historical disconnection of the Brehons and the Druids can be



accepted as a fact, I suggest an enquiry about which there hangs



a certain air of absurdity. There has been so much wild



speculation and assertion about Druids and Druidical antiquities



that the whole subject seems to be considered as almost beyond



the pale of serious discussion. Yet we are not at liberty to



forget that the first great observer of Celtic manners describes



the Celts of the Continent as before all things remarkable for



the literary class which their society included. Let me add that



in Caesar's account of the Druids there is not a word which does



not appear to me perfectly credible. The same remark may be made



of Strabo. But the source of at all events a part of the



absurdities which have clustered round the subject I take to be



the Natural History of Pliny, and they seem to belong to those



stories about plants and animals to which may be traced a great



deal of the nonsense written in the world.



    You may remember the picture given by Caesar of the



Continental Celts, as they appear to him when he first used his



unrivalled opportunities of examining them. He tells us that



their tribal societies consisted substantially of three orders he



calls the Equites, the Druids, and the Plebeians. Somebody has



said that this would be a not very inaccurate description of



French society just before the first Revolution, with its three



orders of Nobles, Clergy, and unprivileged Tiers-État; but the



observation is a good deal more ingenious than true. We are now



able to compare Caesar's account of the Gauls with the evidence



concerning a Celtic community which the Brehon tracts supply; and



if we use this evidence as a test, we shall soon make up our



minds that, though his representation is accurate as far as it



goes, it errs in omission of detail. The Equites, or Chiefs,



though to some extent they were a class apart, did not stand in



such close relation to one another as they stood to the various



septs or groups over which they presided. 'Every chief,' says the



Brehon law, 'rules over his land, whether it be small or whether



it be large.' The Plebeians, again, so far from constituting a



great miscellaneous multitude, were distributed into every sort



of natural group, based ultimately upon the Family. The mistake,



so far as there was error, I conceive to have been an effect of



mental distance. It had the imperfections of the view obtained by



looking on the Gangetic plains from the slopes of the Himalayas.



The impression made is not incorrect, but an immensity of detail



is lost to the observer, and a surface varied by countless small



elevations looks perfectly flat. Caesar's failure to note the



natural divisions of the Celtic tribesmen, the families and septs



or sub-tribes, is to me particularly instructive. The theory of



human equality is of Roman origin; the comminution of human



society, and the unchecked competition among its members, which



have gone so far in the Western Europe of our days, had the most



efficient causes in the mechanism of the Roman State. Hence



Caesar's omissions seem to be those most natural in a Roman



general who was also a great administrator and trained lawyer;



and they are undoubtedly those to which an English ruler of India



is most liable at this moment. It is often said that it takes two



or three years before a Governor-General learns that the vast



Indian population is an aggregate of natural groups, and not the



mixed multitude he left at home; and some rulers of India have



been accused of never having mastered the lesson at all.



    There are a few very important points of detail to be noticed



in Caesar's description of what may be called the lay portion of



Celtic society. I shall afterwards call your attention to the



significance of what he states concerning the classes whom he



calls the clients and debtors of the Equites, and respecting the



increased power which they give to the Chief on whom they are



dependent. It is, however, remarkable that, when he speaks of the



Druids, his statements are greatly more detailed. Here there were



no home associations to mislead him, but, beyond that, it is



plain that his interest was strongly roused by the novel



constitution of this privileged order whom he places by the side



of the Chiefs. Let me recall, then, to you the principal points



of his description, from which I designedly omit all statements



concerning the priestly office of the class described. He tells



us that the Druids were supreme judges in all public and private



disputes; and that, for instance, all questions of homicide, of



inheritance, and of boundary were referred to them for decision.



He says that the Druids presided over schools of learning, to



which the Celtic youth flocked eagerly for instruction, remaining



in them sometimes (so he was informed) for twenty years at a



time. He states that the pupils in these schools learned an



enormous quantity of verses, which were never committed to



writing; and he gives his opinion that the object was not merely



to prevent sacred knowledge from being popularised, but to



strengthen the memory. Besides describing to us the religious



doctrine of the Druids, he informs us that they were extremely



fond of disputing about the nature of the material world, the



movements of the stars, and the dimensions of the earth and of



the universe. At their head there was by his account a chief



Druid, whose place at his death was filled by election, and the



succession occasionally gave rise to violent contests of arms



(B.G. vi, 13, 14).



    There are some strong and even startling points of



correspondence between the functions of the Druids, as described



by Caesar, and the office of the Brehon, as suggested by the



law-tracts. The extensive literature of law just disinterred



testifies to the authority of the Brehons in all legal matters,



and raises a strong presumption that they were universal referees



in disputes. Among their writings are separate treatises on



inheritance and boundary, and almost every page of the



translations contains a reference to the 'eric'-fine for



homicide. The schools of literature and law appear to have been



numerous in ancient Ireland, and O'Curry is able to give the



course of instruction in one of them extending over twelve years.



All literature, including even law, seems to have been identified



with poetry. the chief Druid of Caesar meets us on the very



threshold of the Senchus Mor, in the person of Dubhthach Mac ua



Lugair, the royal poet of Erin, the Brehon who was chosen by St



Patrick to arbitrate in a question of homicide, and whose 'mouth'



the saint 'blessed'. The mode of choosing the chief Druid, by



election, has its counterpart in the institution of Tanistry,



which within historical times determined the succession to all



high office in Ireland, and which was hateful to the English, as



affording smaller security for order than their own less archaic



form of primogeniture. Nor is that all. The Prefaces in Irish to



the tracts contain a number of discussions on subjects which are



in no way legal, or which are forced into some connection with



law by the most violent expedients. They leave on the mind the



impression of being a patchwork of materials, probably of very



various antiquity, which happen to have been fond in the archives



of particular law-schools. Now, the Preface to the Senchus Mor



actually contains disquisitions on all the matters about which



Caesar declares the Druids to have been specially fond of



arguing. It in one place sets forth how God made the heaven and



the earth, but the account is not the least like the Mosaic



account. It goes off, as Caesar's Druids did, into a number of



extraordinary statements, 'de sideribus atque eorum motu', 'de



mundi ac terrarum magnitudine'. Among other things, it declares



that God fixed seven divisions from the firmament to the earth,



and that the distance he measured from the moon to the sun was



244 miles. 'And the first form of the firmament was ordained



thus: as the shell is about the egg, so is the firmament round



the earth in fixed suspension... there are six windows in each



part through the firmament to shed light through, so that there



are sixty-six windows in it, and a glass shutter for each window;



so that the whole firmament is a might sheet of crystal and a



protecting bulwark round the earth, with three heavens, and three



heavens about it; and the seventh was arrange in three heavens.



this last, however, is not the habitation of angels, but is like



a wheel revolving round, nd the firmament is thus revolting, and



also the seven planets, since the time when they were created'.



Parts of the passage reflect the astronomical notions known to



have been current in the Middle Ages, but much of it reads like a



fragment of a heathen cosmology, to which a later revision has



given a faint Christian colouring. The same Preface contains also



some curious speculations on the etymology of law-terms, and the



Preface to the Book of Aicill enters, among other things, into



the question of the difference between genus and species.



    I suggest, therefore, that the same tendencies which produced



among the Celts of the Continent the class called the Druids



produced among the Celts of Ireland the class known to us as the



Brehons; nor does it seem to me difficult to connect the results



of these tendencies with other known phenomena of ancient



society. There is much reason to believe that the Tribe-Chief, or



King, whom the earliest Aryan records show us standing by the



side of the Popular Assembly, was priest and judge as well as



captain of the host. The later Aryan history shows us this



blended authority distributing or 'differentiating' itself, and



passing either to the Assembly or to a new class of depositaries.



Among the Achaeans of Homer, the Chief has ceased to be priest,



but he is still judge; and his judicial sentences, Themiotes, or



'dooms', however much they may be drawn in reality from



pre-exiting usage, are believed to be dictated to him from on



high. Among the Celts both of Gaul and of Ireland he has ceased



to be priest, and also probably to be judge, although some



measure of judicial authority may still belong to his office as a



'survival'. The order of change thus departs from that followed



in Athenian history, where the institution of kingship survived



only in the name of the King Archon, who was a judicial



functionary, and from that followed in Roman history, where the



Rex Sacrificulus was a hierophant or priest. The Popular



Assembly, meanwhile, which virtually attracted to itself the



whole civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Kings among the



Athenians, and which at Rome engrossed the whole administration



of criminal justice through the commissions it appointed, seems



to lose all judicial authority among the Celts. Perhaps I may be



permitted thus to describe the change I conceive to have taken



place among the Celts of Ireland. Themis, who in Homer is the



assessor of Zeus and the source of judicial inspiration to kings,



has (so to speak) set up for herself. Kings have delegated their



authority to a merely human assessor, and we see by the story



which begins the Senchus Mor that, even when a Saint is supposed



to be present, the inspiration of which he is the source does not



find expression through his lips, nor does it descend on the



King; it descends on the professional judge. When we obtain our



last glimpse of the class which has received this inheritance



from Chief or King -- the Brehons, Judges, or Authors of



Judgments -- they have sunk to the lowest depth of misery and



degradation through the English conquest. At an earlier date they



are seen divided into families or septs, the hereditary



law-advisers of some princely or powerful house. Hugh McEgan, who



wrote the note 'in his own father's book' which I read in the



last Lecture, was one of the hereditary Brehons attached to the



McCarthys. But, in the earliest Irish traditions, the functions



of the Brehon and the King run very much into one another. The



most ancient Brehons are described as of royal blood, sometimes



as king's sons. The Tanaists of the great Irish Chiefs, the



successors elected out of the kindred of each Chief to come after



him on his death, are said to have occasionally officiated as



judges; and one of the law-tracts, still unpublished, contains



the express rule that it is lawful for a king, though himself a



judge, to have a judge in his place. Cormac MacAirt, one of the



traditional authors of the Book of Aicill, was a King in



retirement. Apocryphal as his story may be, it is one of much



significance to the student of ancient institutions. He had been



accidently blinded of one eye,and is said to have been deposed



from his regal office or chieftiancy on account of the blemish.



Coirpri, his son and successor (says the Book of Aicill), 'in



every difficult case of judgment that came to him used to go and



ask his father about it, and his father used to say to him, "My



son, that thou mayest know"' -- and then proceeded to lay down



the law.



    If, without committing ourselves to any specific theory



concerning the exact extent of the correspondence, we can assume



that there was substantial identity between the literary class



which produced the law-tracts and the literary order attributed



to the Celtic races by Caesar, we not only do something to



establish an historical conclusion perhaps more curious than



important, but we remove some serious difficulties in the



interpretation of the interesting and instructive body of archaic



law now before us. The difference between the Druids and their



successors, the Brehons, would in that case be mainly this: the



Brehons would be no longer priests. All sacerdotal or religious



authority must have passed, on the conversion of the Irish Celts,



to the 'tribes of the saints' -- to the missionary monastic



societies founded at all points of the island -- and to that



multitude of bishops dependent on them, whom it is so difficult



to reconcile with any of our preconceived ideas as to ancient



ecclesiastical organisation. The consequence would be that the



religious sanctions of the ancient laws, the supernatural



penalties threatened on their violation, would disappear, except



so far as the legal rules exactly coincided with the rules of the



new Christian code, the 'law of the letter.' Now, the want of a



sanction is occasionally one of the great difficulties in



understanding the Brehon law. Suppose a man disobeyed the rule or



resisted its application, what would happen? The learned writer



of one of the modern prefaces prefixed to the Third Volume of the



Ancient Laws contents that the administration of the Brehon



system consisted in references to arbitration; and I certainly



think myself that, so far as the system is known, it points to



that conclusion. The one object of the Brehons was to force



disputants to refer their quarrels to a Brehon, or to some person



in authority advised by a Brehon, and thus a vast deal of the law



tends to run into the Law of Distress, which declares the various



methods by which a man can be compelled through seizure of his



property to consent to an arbitration. But then one cannot help



perpetually feeling that the compulsion is weak as compared with



the stringency of the process of modern Courts of Justice; and



besides that, why should not the man attempted to be distrained



upon constantly resist with success? Doubtless the law provides



penalties for resistance; but where is the ultimate sanction?



Caesar supplies an answer, which must, I think, contain a portion



of the truth. He says that if a Celt of Gaul refused to abide by



a Druid judgment he was excommunicated: which was esteemed the



heaviest of penalties. Another example which I can give you of



the want or weakness of the sanction in the Brehon law is a very



remarkable one, and I shall recur to it hereafter. If you have a



legal claim against a man of a certain rank and you are desirous



of compelling him to discharge it, the Senchus Mor tells you to



'fast upon him.' 'Notice', it says, 'precedes distress in the



case of the inferior grades, except it be by persons of



distinction or upon persons of distinction; fasting precedes



distress in their case' ('Ancient Laws of Ireland,' vol. i, p.



113). The institution is unquestionably identical with one widely



diffused throughout the East, which is called by the Hindoos



'sitting dharna'. It consists in sitting at your debtor's door



and starving yourself till he pays. From the English point of



view the practice has always been considered barbarous and



immoral, and the Indian Penal Code expressly forbids it. It



suggests, however, the question -- what would follow if the



creditor simply allowed the debtor to starve? Undoubtedly the



Hindoo supposes that some supernatural penalty would follow;



indeed, he generally gives definiteness to it by retaining a



Brahmin to starve himself vicariously, and no Hindoo doubts what



would come of causing a Brahmin's death. We cannot but suppose



that the Brehon rule of fasting was once thought to have been



enforced in some similar way. Caesar states that the Druids



believed in the immortality and transmigration of the soul, and



considered it the key of their system. A Druid may thus very well



have taught that penal consequences in another world would follow



the creditor's death by starvation; and there is perhaps a pale



reflection of this doctrine in the language of the Senchus Mor:



'He who does not give a pledge to fasting is an evader of all; he



who disregards all things shall not be paid by God or man.' But



an Irish Brehon could scarcely make any distinct assertion on the



subject, since fasting had now become a specific ordinance of the



Christian Church, and its condition and spiritual effects were



expressly defined by the Christian priesthood. Theoretically, I



should state, a person who refused unjustly to yield to fasting



had his legal liabilities considerably increased, at least,



according to the dicta of the Brehon commentators; but such



provisions only bring us to the difficulty of which I first



spoke, and raise anew the question of the exact value of legal



rules at a period when Courts of Justice are not as yet armed



with resistless powers of compelling attendance and submission.



    If we are justified in tracing the pedigree of the Brehon



Code to a system enforced by supernatural sanctions, we are able



to contrast it in various ways with other bodies of law in



respect of its mode of development. It closely resembles the



Hindoo law, inasmuch as it consists of what was in all



probability an original basis of Aryan usage vastly enlarged by a



superstructure of interpretation which a long succession of



professional commentators have elected; but it cannot have had



any such sacredness, and consequently any such authority, as the



Brahminical jurisprudence. Both the Brahmins and the Brehons



assume that Kings and Judges will enforce their law, and



emphatically enjoin on them its enforcement; but, while the



Brahmin could declare that neglect or disobedience would be



followed by endless degradation and torment, the Brehon could



only assert that the unlearned brother who pronounced a false



judgment would find blotches come on his cheeks, and that the



Chief who allowed sound usage to be departed from would bring bad



weather on his country. The development of the Brehon law was



again parallel to that which there is strong reason for supposing



the Roman law to have allowed in early times. The writer of the



Preface to the Third Volume, from which I have more than once



quoted, cites some observations which I published several years



ago on the subject of the extension of the Roman jurisprudence by



the agency known as the Responsa Prudentum, the accumulated



answers (or, as the Brehon phrase is, the judgments) of many



successive generations of famous Roman lawyers; and he adopts my



account as giving the most probable explanation of the growth of



the Brehon law. But in the Roman State a test was always applied



to the 'answers of the learned,' which was not applied, or not



systematically applied, to the judgments of the Brehons. We never



know the Romans except as subject to one of the strongest of



central governments, which armed the law courts with the force at



its command. Although the Roman system did not work exactly in



the way to which our English experience has accustomed us, there



can, of course, be no doubt that the ultimate criterion of the



validity of professional legal opinion at Rome, as elsewhere, was



the action of Courts of Justice enforcing rights and duties in



conformity with such opinion. But in ancient Ireland it is at



least doubtful whether there was ever, in our sense of the words,



a central government; it is also doubtful whether the public



force at the command of any ruler or rulers was ever



systematically exerted through the mechanism of Courts of



Justice; and it is at least a tenable view that the institutions



which stood in the place of Courts of Justice only exercised



jurisdiction through the voluntary submission of intending



litigants.



    Perhaps, however, from our present point of view, the



strongest contrast is between the ancient law of Ireland and the



law of England at a period which an English lawyer would not call



recent. The administration of justice in England, from



comparatively early times, has been more strongly centralised



than in any other European country; but in Ireland there was no



central government to nerve the arm of the law. The process of



the English Courts has for centuries past been practically



irresistible; the process of the Irish Courts, even if it was



compulsory, was at the utmost extremely weak. The Irish law was



developed by hereditary commentators; but we in England have



always attributed far less authority than does any European



Continental community to the unofficial commentaries of the most



learned writers of textbooks. We obtain our law, and adjust it to



the needs of each successive generation, either through



legislative enactment or through the decisions of our judges on



isolated groups of facts established by the most laborious



methods. But, as I have already stated, the opinion to which I



incline is, that no part of the Brehon law had its origin in



legislation. The author of innovation and improvement was the



learned Brehon, and the Brehon appears to have invented at



pleasure the facts which he used as the framework for his legal



doctrine. His invention was necessarily limited by his



experience, and hence the cases suggested in the law-tracts



possess great interest, as throwing light on the society amid



which they were composed; but these cases seem to be purely



hypothetical, and only intended to illustrate the rule which



happens to be under discussion.



    In the volume of my own to which I referred a few moments ago



I said of the early Roman law that 'great influence must have



been exercised (over it) by the want of any distinct check on the



suggestion or invention of possible questions. When the data can



be multiplied at pleasure, the facilities for evolving a general



rule are immensely increased. As the law is administered among



ourselves (in England) the judge cannot travel out of the sets of



facts exhibited before him or before his predecessors.



Accordingly, each group of circumstances which is adjudicated



upon receives, to employ a Gallicism, a sort of consecration. It



acquires certain qualities which distinguish it from every other



case, genuine or hypothetical.' I do not think it can be doubted



that this English practice of never declaring a legal rule



authoritatively until a state of facts arises to which it can be



fitted, is the secret of the apparent backwardness and barrenness



of English law at particular epochs, as contrasted with the



richness and reasonableness of other systems which it more than



rivals in its present condition. It is true, as I said before,



even of the Brehon law, that it does not wholly disappoint the



patriotic expectations entertained of it. When they are



disencumbered of archaic phrase and form, there are some things



remarkably modern in it. I quite agree with one of the Editors



that, in the ancient Irish Law of Civil Wrong, there is a



singularly close approach to modern doctrines on the subject of



Contributory Negligence; and I have found it possible to extract



from the quaint texts of the Book of Aicill some extremely



sensible rulings on the difficult subject of the Measure of



Damages, for which it would be vain to study the writings of Lord



Coke, though these last are relatively of much later date. But



the Brehon law pays heavily for this apparent anticipation of the



modern legal spirit. It must be confessed that most of it has a



strong air of fancifulness and unreality. It seems as if the



Brehon lawyer, after forming (let us say) a conception of a



particular kind of injury, set himself, as a sort of mental



exercise, to devise all the varieties of circumstance under which



the wrong could be committed, and then to determine the way in



which some traditional principle of redress could be applied to



the cases supposed. This indulgence of his imagination drew him



frequently into triviality or silliness, and led to an



extraordinary multiplication of legal detail. Four pages of the



Book of Aicill (a very large proportion of an ancient body of



law) are concerned with injuries received from dogs in



dog-fights, and they set forth in the most elaborate way the



modification of the governing rule required in the case of the



owners -- in the case of the spectators -- in the case of the



'impartial interposer' -- in the case of the 'half-interposer,'



i. e. the man who tries to separate the dogs with a bias in



favour of one of them -- in the case of an accidental looker-on



-- in the case of a youth under age, and in the case of an idiot.



The same law-tract deals also with the curious subjects of



injuries from a cat stealing in a kitchen, from women using their



distaffs in a woman-battle, and from bees, a distinction being



drawn between the case in which the sting draws blood and the



case in which it does not. Numberless other instances could be



given; but I repeat that all this is mixed up with much that even



now has juridical interest, and with much which in that state of



society had probably the greatest practical importance.



    It is not, perhaps, as often noticed as it should be by



English writers on law that the method of enunciating legal



principles with which our Courts of Justice have familiarised us



is absolutely peculiar to England and to communities under the



direct influence of English practice. In all Western societies,



Legislation, which is the direct issue of the commands of the



sovereign state, tends more and more to become the exclusive



source of law; but still in all Continental countries other



authorities of various kinds are occasionally referred to, among



which are the texts of the Roman Corpus Juris, commentaries on



Codes and other bodies of written law, the unofficial writings of



famous lawyers, and other branches of the vast literature of law



holding at most a secondary place in the estimation of the



English Judges and Bar. Nowhere, however, is anything like the



same dignity as with us attributed to a decided 'case,' and I



have found it difficult to make foreign lawyers understand why



their English brethren should bow so implicitly to what Frenchmen



term the 'jurisprudence' of a particular tribunal. From one point



of view English law has doubtless suffered through this



reluctance to invent or imagine facts aS the groundwork of rules,



and it will continue to bear the marks of the injury until



legislative re-arrangement and re-statement fully disclose the



stores of common sense which are at present concealed by its



defects of language and form. On the other hand, these habits of



the English Courts seem to be closely connected with one of the



most honourable characteristics of the English system, its



extreme carefulness about facts. Nowhere else in the world is



there the same respect for a fact, unless the respect be of



English origin. The feeling is not shared by our European



contemporaries, and was not shared by our remote ancestors. It



has been said -- and the remark seems to me a very just one --



that in early times questions of fact are regarded as the



simplest of all questions. Such tests of truth as Ordeal and



Compurgation satisfy men's minds completely and easily, and the



only difficulty recognised is the discovery of the legal



tradition and its application to the results of the test. Up to a



certain point no doubt our own mechanism for the determination of



a fact is also a mere artifice. We take as our criterion of truth



the unanimous opinion of twelve men on statements made before



them. But then the mode of convincing, or attempting to convince,



them is exactly that which would have to be followed if it were



sought to obtain a decision upon evidence from the very highest



human intelligence. The old procedure was sometimes wholly



senseless, sometimes only distantly rational; the modern English



procedure is at most imperfect, and some of its imperfection



arises from the very constitution of human nature and human



society. I quite concur, therefore, in the ordinary professional



opinion that its view of facts and its modes of ascertaining them



are the great glory of English law. I am afraid, however, that



facts must always be the despair of the law reformer. Bentham



seems to me from several expressions to have supposed that if the



English Law of Evidence were re-constructed on his principles



questions of fact would cease to present any serious difficulty.



Almost every one of his suggestions has been adopted by the



Legislature, and yet enquiries into facts become more protracted



and complex than ever. The truth is that the facts of human



nature, with which Courts of Justice have chiefly to deal, are



far obscurer and more intricately involved than the facts of



physical nature; and the difficulty of ascertaining them with



precision constantly increases in our age, through the progress



of invention and enterprise, through the ever-growing



miscellaneousness of all modern communities, and through the ever



quickening play of modern social movements. Possibly we may see



English law take the form which Bentham hoped for and laboured



for; every successive year brings us in some slight degree nearer



to this achievement; and consequently, little as we may agree in



his opinion that all questions of law are the effect of some



judicial delusion or legal abuse, we may reasonably expect them



to become less frequent and easier of solution. But neither facts



nor the modes of ascertaining them tend in the least to simplify



themselves, and in no conceivable state of society will Courts of



Justice enjoy perpetual vacation.



    I have been at some pains to explain what sort of authority



the Irish Brehon law did not, in my opinion, possess. The 'law of



nature' had lost all supernatural sanction, except so far as it



coincided with the 'law of the letter.' It had not yet acquired,



or had very imperfectly acquired, that binding power which law



obtains when the State exerts the public force through Courts of



Justice to compel obedience to it. Had it, then, any authority at



all; and if so, what sort of authority? Part of the answer to



this question I endeavoured to give three years ago ('Village



Communities, in the East and West,' pp. 56, 57); and though much



more might be said on the subject, I defer it till another



opportunity. So far as the Brehon law declared actual ancient and



indigenous practices, it shared in the obstinate vitality of all



customs when observed by a society distributed into corporate



natural groups. But, besides this, it had another source of



influence over men's minds, in the bold and never flagging



self-assertion of the class which expounded it. A portion of the



authority enjoyed by the Indian Brahminical jurisprudence is



undoubtedly to be explained in the same way. The Brehon could



not, like the Brahmin, make any such portentous assertion as that



his order sprang from the head of Brahma, that it was an



embodiment of perfect purity, and that the first teacher of its



lore was a direct emanation from God. But the Brehon did claim



that St. Patrick and other great Irish saints had sanctioned the



law which he declared, and that some of them had even revised it.



Like the Brahmin, too, he never threw away an opportunity of



affirming the dignity of his profession. In these law-tracts the



heads of this profession are uniformly placed, where Caesar



placed the Druids, on the same level with the highest classes of



Celtic society. The fines payable for injury to them, and their



rights of feasting at the expense of other classes (a form of



right which will demand much attention from us hereafter), are



adjusted to those of Bishops and Sings. It is more than likely



that the believing multitude ended by accepting these



pretensions. From what we know of that stage of thought we can



hardly set limits to the amount of authority spontaneously



conceded to the utterances of a sole literary class. It must have



struck many that the influence of the corresponding class in our



own modern society far exceeds anything which could have been



asserted of it from the mere consideration of our social



mechanism. There is, perhaps, an impression abroad that the



influence it exerts increases as history goes on, an impression



possibly produced and certainly strengthened by the brilliant



passages in which Lord Macaulay contrasted the well-paid literary



labour of his own day with the miseries of the literary hack of



Grub Street a century before. I think that this opinion, if



broadly stated, is at the very least doubtful. The class which,



to use a modern neologism, 'formulates' the ideas dimly conceived



by the multitude -- which saves it mental trouble by collecting



through generalisation, which is an essentially labour-saving



process, the scattered fragments of its knowledge and experience



-- has not always consisted of philosophers, historians, and



novelists, but had earlier representatives in poets, priests, and



lawyers. It is not at all a paradoxical opinion that these last



were its most powerful members. For, nowadays, it has to cope



with the critical faculty, more or less found everywhere, and



enormously strengthened by observation of the methods of physical



discovery. No authority of our day is possibly comparable with



that of the men who, in an utterly uncritical age, simply said of



a legal rule, 'So it has been laid down by the learned,' or used



the still more impressive formula, 'It is thus written.'



    While, however, I fully believe that the Brehon law possessed



great authority, I think also that it was in all probability



irregularly and intermittently enforced, and that partial and



local departures from it were common all over ancient Ireland.



Anybody who interested himself in the question of its practical



application would have to encounter the very problems which are



suggested by the Brahminical Hindoo law. The student of this last



system, especially if he compares it with the infinity of local



usage practised in India, is constantly asking himself how far



was the law of the Brahmin jurists observed before the English



undertook to enforce it through their tribunals? The Editor of



the Third Volume of the Ancient Laws of Ireland has given a very



apposite example of a problem of the same kind (iii. 146), by



extracting from the Carew Papers the story of a famous dispute as



to the headship of the great irish house of O'Neill. Con O'Neill,



its chief, had two sons, Matthew and Shane. Matthew O'Neill was



heir to Con O'Neill's earldom of Tyrone, according to the



limitations of the patent. Shane O'Neill urged on the English



Government that these limitations were void, because the King, in



granting the earldom, could not have been aware that Matthew



O'Neill was an adulterine bastard, having been in truth born of



the wife of a smith in Dundalk. Shane O'Neill has been regarded



as the champion of purely Irish ideas (see Froude, 'English in



Ireland,' I. 43); but though the rule of legitimacy upon which he



insisted conforms to our notions, it is directly contrary to the



legal doctrine of the Book of Aicill, which in one of its most



surprising passages lays down formally the procedure by which the



natural father could bring into his family a son born under the



alleged circumstances of Matthew O'Neill, on paying compensation



to the putative parent. Unless Shane O'Neill's apparent ignorance



of this method of legitimation was merely affected for the



purpose of blinding the English Government, it would seem to



follow that the Book of Aicill, though its authorship was



attributed to King Cormac, had not an universally recognised



authority.



    I do not know that the omission of the English, when they had



once thoroughly conquered the country, to enforce the Brehon law



through the Courts which they established, has ever been reckoned



among the wrongs of Ireland. But if they had done this. they



would have effected the very change which at a much later period



they brought about in India, ignorantly, but with the very best



intentions. They would have given immensely greater force and a



much larger sphere to a system of rules loosely and occasionally



administered before they armed them with a new authority. Even as



it was, I cannot doubt that the English did much to perpetuate



the Brehon law in the shape in which we find it. The Anglo-Norman



settlement on the east coast of Ireland acted like a running



sore, constantly Stating the Celtic regions beyond the Pale, and



deepening the confusion which prevailed there. If the country had



been left to itself, one of the great Irish tribes would almost



certainly have conquered the rest. All the legal ideas which,



little conscious as we are of their source, come to us from the



existence of a strong central government lending its vigour to



the arm of justice would have made their way into the Brehon law;



and the gap between the alleged civilisation of England and the



alleged barbarism of Ireland during much of their history, which



was in reality narrower than is commonly supposed, would have



almost wholly disappeared.



    Before I close this chapter it is necessary to state that the



Brehon law has not been unaffected by the two main influences



which have made the modern law of Western Europe different from



the ancient, Christian morality and Roman jurisprudence. It has



been modified by Roman juridical ideas in some degree, though it



would be hazardous to lay down with any attempt at precision in



what degree. I have trustworthy information that, in the tracts



translated but not yet published, a certain number of Roman legal



maxims are cited, and one Rowan jurisconsult is mentioned by



name. So far as the published tracts afford materials for an



opinion, I am inclined to think that the influence of the Roman



law has been very slight, and to attribute it not to study of the



writings of the Roman lawyers, but to contact with Churchmen



imbued more Or less with Roman legal notions. We may be quite



sure that the Brehons were indebted to them for one conception



which is present in the tracts -- the conception of a Will; and



we may probably credit the Church with the comparatively advanced



development of another conception which we find here -- the



conception of a Contract. The origin of the rules concerning



testamentary bequest which are sometimes found in Western bodies



of law otherwise archaic has been much considered of late years;



and the weight of learned opinion inclines strongly to the view



that these rules had universally their source in Roman law, but



were diffused by the influence of the Christian clergy. This



assertion cannot be quite so confidently made of Contracts; but



the sacredness of bequests and the sacredness of promises were of



about equal importance to the Church, as the donee of pious



gifts; and, as regards the Brehon law, it is plain upon the face



of the published sub-tract which is chiefly concerned with



Contract, the Corus Bescna, that the material interests of the



Church furnished one principal motive for its compilation. The



Corus Bescna, in which, I may observe, a certain confusion (not



uncommon in ancient law) may be remarked between contracts and



grants, between the promise to give and the act or operation of



giving, contains some very remarkable propositions on the subject



of contract. Here, and in other parts of the Senchus Mor, the



mischiefs of breach of contract are set forth in the strongest



language. 'The world would be in a state of confusion if verbal



contracts were not binding.' 'There are three periods at which



the world dies: the period of a plague, of a general war, of the



dissolution of verbal contracts.' 'The world is worthless at the



time of the dissolution of contracts.' At first sight this looks



a good deal liker the doctrine of the eighteenth century than of



any century between the sixth and the sixteenth. Let us see,



however, what follows when the position thus broadly stated has



to be worked out. We come, in the Corus Bescna, upon the



following attempt at classification, which I fear would have



deeply shocked Jeremy Bentham and John Austin: 'How many kinds of



contracts are there?' asks the Brehon textwriter. 'Two,' is the



answer. 'A valid contract, and an invalid contract.' This, no



doubt, is absurd, but the explanation appears to be as follows.



The principle of the absolute sacredness of contracts was



probably of foreign origin, and was insisted upon for a



particular purpose. It was therefore laid down too broadly for



the actual state of the law and the actual condition of Irish



Celtic society. Under such circumstances a treatise on Contract



takes necessarily the form in great measure of a treatise on the



grounds of invalidity in contracts, on the manifold exceptions to



an over-broad general rule. Anciently, the power of contracting



is limited on all sides. It is limited by the rights of your.



family, by the rights of your distant kinsmen, by the rights of



your co-villagers, by the rights of your tribe, by the rights of



your Chief, and, if you contract adversely to the Church, by the



rights of the Church. The Corus Bescna is in great part a



treatise on these archaic limitations. At the same time some of



the modern grounds of invalidity are very well set forth, and the



merit may possibly be due to the penetration of Roman doctrine



into the Brehon law-schools.



    Something must be said on the extent to which Christian



opinion has leavened these Brehon writings. Christianity has



certainly had considerable negative influence over them. It



became no longer possible for the Brehon to assert that the



transgressor of his rules would incur a supernatural penalty, and



the consequences of this were no doubt important. But still, as



you have seen, in the case of 'fasting on a man,' or 'sitting



dharna,' the heathen rule remained in the system, though its



significance was lost. Again, one positive result of the



reception by the Brehons of the so-called 'law of the letter'



appears to have been the development of a great mass of rules



relating to the territorial rights of the Church, and these



constitute a very interesting department of the Brehon law. But



there has certainty been nothing like an intimate



interpenetration of ancient Irish law by Christian principle. If



this kind of influence is to be looked for anywhere, it must be



in the law of Marriage, and the cognate branches of Divorce,



Legitimacy, and Inheritance. These, however, are the very



portions of the Brehon law which have been dwelt upon by writers



convinced that, as regards the relations of the sexes, the



primitive Irish were near akin to those Celts of Britain of whose



practices Caesar had heard. (B. G., v. 14.) The 'Book of Aicill'



provides for the legitimation not only of the bastard, but of the



adulterine bastard, and measures the compensation to be paid to



the putative father. The tract on 'Social Connections ' appears



to assume that the temporary cohabitation of the sexes is part of



the accustomed order of society, and on this assumption it



minutely regulates the mutual rights of the parties, showing an



especial care for the interests of the woman, even to the extent



of reserving to her the value of her domestic services during her



residence in the common dwelling. One remark ought, however, to



be made on these provisions of the Brehon law. It is not



inconceivable that, surprising as they are, they may be the index



to a social advance. Caesar plainly found the Celts of the



Continent polygamous, living in families held together by



stringent Paternal Power. He, a Roman, familiar with a Patria



Potestas as yet undecayed, thinks it worthy of remark that the



head of a Gallic household had the power of life and death over



his wives as well as his children, and notices with astonishment



that, when a husband died under suspicious circumstances, his



wives were treated with the same cruelty as a body of household



slaves at Rome whose master had been killed by an unknown hand.



(B. G., vi. 19.) Now, though very much cannot be confidently said



about the transition (which, nevertheless, is an undoubted fact)



of many societies from polygamy to monogamy under influences



other than those of religion, it may plausibly be conjectured



that here and there it had its cause in liberty of divorce. The



system which permitted a plurality of wives may have passed into



the system which forbade more than one wife at a time, but which



did not go farther. The monogamy of the modern and Western world



is, in fact, the monogamy of the Romans, from which the license



of divorce has been expelled by Christian morality. There are



hardly any materials for an opinion upon the degree of influence



exercised by the Church over the transformation of



marriage-relations in Ireland, but there are several indications



that the ecclesiastical rules as to the conditions of a valid



marriage established themselves very slowly among the ruder races



on the outskirts of what had been the Roman Empire. Mr Burton



('History of Scotland,' ii. 213), in speaking of the number of



illegitimate claimants who brought their pretensions to the Crown



of Scotland before Edward the First, observes: 'That they should



have pushed their claims only shows that the Church had not yet



absolutely established the rule that from her and her ceremony



and sacrament could alone come the union capable of transmitting



a right of succession to offspring.' The tract on 'Social



Connexions' notices a 'first' wife, and the recognition may be



attributable to the Church, but on the whole my impression



certainly is that the extremely ascetic form under which



Christianity was introduced into Ireland was unfavourable to its



obtaining a hold on popular morality. The common view seems to



have been that chastity was the professional virtue of a special



class, for the Brehon tracts, which make the assumptions I have



described as to the morals of the laity, speak of irregularity of



life in a monk or bishop with the strongest reprobation and



disgust. At the present moment Ireland is probably the one of all



Western countries in which the relations of the sexes are most



nearly on the footing required by the Christian theory; nor is



there any reasonable doubt that this result has been brought



about in the main by the Roman Catholic clergy. But this



purification of morals was effected during the period through



which monks and monasticism were either expelled from Ireland or



placed under the ban of the law.



    I will take this opportunity of saying that the influence of



Christianity on a much more famous system than the Brehon law has



always seemed to me to be greatly overstated by M. Troplong and



other well-known juridical writers. There is, of course, evidence



of Christian influence on Roman law in the disabilities imposed



on various classes of heretics and in the limitations of that



liberty of divorce which belonged to the older jurisprudence.



But, even in respect of divorce, the modifications strike me as



less than might have been expected from what we know of the



condition of opinion in the Roman world; and, as regards certain



improvements said to have been introduced by Christianity into



the Imperial law of slavery, they were probably quickened by its



influence, but they began in principles which were of Stoical



rather than of Christian origin. I do not question the received



opinion that Christianity greatly mitigated and did much to



abolish personal and predial slavery in the West, but the



Continental lawyers of whom I spoke considerably antedate its



influence, and take far too little account of the prodigious



effects subsequently produced by the practical equality of all



men within the pale of the Catholic priesthood. But I principally



deprecate these statements, which in some countries have almost



become professional commonplaces, for two reasons. They slur over



a very instructive fact, the great unmalleability of all bodies



of law. and they obscure an interesting and yet unsettled,



problem, the origin of the Canon law. The truth seems to be that



the Imperial Roman law did not satisfy the morality of the



Christian communities, and this is the most probable reason why



another body of rules grew up by its side and ultimately almost



rivalled it.








