


Lecture VII

Ancient Divisions of the Family


    'Before the establishment of the (English) common law, all
the possessions within the Irish territories ran either in course
of Tanistry or in course of Gavelkind. Every Signory or Chiefry
with the portion of land which passed with it went without
partition to the Tanist, who always came in by election or with
the strong hand, and not by descent; but all inferior tenanties
were partible between males in Gavelkind.' (Sir J. Davis'
Reports, 'Le Cas de Gavelkind,' Hil. 3, Jac. 1, before all the
Judges.)
    This passage occurs in one of the famous cases in which the
Anglo-Irish Judges affirmed the illegality of the native Irish
tenures of land. They declared the English common law to be in
force in Ireland, and thenceforward the eldest son succeeded, as
heir-at-law, both to lands which were attached to a Signory and
to estates which had been divided according to the peculiar Irish
custom here called Gavelkind. The Judges thoroughly knew that
they were making a revolution, and they probably thought that
they were substituting a civilised institution for a set of
mischievous usages proper only for barbarians. Yet there is
strong reason for thinking that Tanistry is the form of
succession from which Primogeniture descended, and that the Irish
Gavelkind, which they sharply distinguished from the Gavelkind of
Kent, was nothing more than an archaic form of this same
institution, of which Courts in England have always taken
judicial notice, and which prevailed far more widely on the
European Continent than succession by Primogeniture.
    It will be convenient that we should first consider the
so-called Gavelkind of Ireland, which is thus described by Sir
John Davis: 'By the Irish custom of Gavelkind, the inferior
tenanties were partible among all the males of the Sept, both
Bastards and Legitimate; and, after partition made, if any one of
the Sept had died, his portion was not divided among his sonnes,
but the Chief of the Sept made a new partition of all the lands
belonging to that Sept, and gave every one his part according to
his antiquity.'
    This statement occasions some perplexity, which does not,
however, arise from its being antecedently incredible. It is
made, you will observe, not of the Clan or Tribe in its largest
extension, but of the Sept. The first was a large and
miscellaneous body, composed in great part of men whose
relationship of blood with the Chief and the mass of free
tribesmen, was a mere fiction. The last was a much smaller body,
whose proximity to a common ancestor was close enough to admit of
their kinship either being a fact or being believed to be a fact.
It apparently corresponded to the small Highland communities
observed in Scotland, by an English officer of Engineers about
1730. 'They (the Highlanders) are divided into tribes or clans
under chiefs or chieftains, and each clan is again divided into
branches from the main stock, who have chieftains over them.
These are Subdivided into smaller branches, of fifty or sixty
men, who deduce their original from their particular chieftains.
(Quoted by Skene, 'Highlanders,' i. p. 156.) Such a body, as I
have already stated, seems to be the Joint Family well known to
the Hindoos, but continued as a corporate unit (which is very
rarely the case in India), through several successive
generations. There is no difference in principle, and little in
practical effect, between the mode of succession described by
Davis and the way in which a Hindoo Joint Family is affected by
the death of one of its members. All the property being held in
common, and all earnings being brought into the 'common chest or
purse,' the lapse of any one life would have the effect,
potentially if not actually, of distributing the dead man's share
among all the kindred united in the family group. And if, on a
dissolution of the Joint Family, the distribution of its effects
were not per capita but per stirpes, this would correspond to
what Davis probably means when he describes the Chief as giving
to each man 'according to his antiquity.'
    The special novelty of the information supplied to us by the
ancient Irish law consists in its revealing to us a society of
Aryan race, settled, indeed, on the land, and much influenced by
its settlement, but preserving an exceptional number of the ideas
and rules belonging to the time when kinship and not the land is
the basis of social union. There is, therefore, nothing
extraordinary in our finding, among the ancient usages of the
Irish, an institution savouring so much of the 'natural
communism' of the primitive forms of property as this Irish
Gavelkind. This 'natural communism,' I have repeatedly urged,
does not arise from any theory or * priori assumption as to the
best or justest mode of dividing the land of a community, but
from the simple impossibility, according to primitive notions, of
making a distinction between a number of kinsmen solely connected
by their real or assumed descent from a common ancestor. The
natural solvent of this communism is the land itself upon which
the kindred are settled. As the common ancestry fades away into
indistinctness, and the community gets to consider itself less an
assemblage of blood-relations than a body of co-villagers, each
household clings with increasing tenacity to the allotment which
it has once obtained, and re-divisions of the land among the
whole community, whether at fixed periods or at a death, become
rarer and rarer, and at last cease altogether, or survive only as
a tradition. In this way the widely diffused but modified form of
tribal succession, which in England is called Gavelkind, is at
last established; the descendants of the latest holder take his
property, to the exclusion of everybody else, and the rights of
the portion of the community outside the family dwindle to a veto
on sales, or to a right of controlling the modes of cultivation.
Nevertheless, surveying the Aryan world as a whole, and looking
to societies in which some fragments of the ancient social
organisation still survive, we can discover forms of succession
or property which come surprisingly near to the Irish Gavelkind
described by Davis. The best example of this occurs in a practice
which existed down to our own day over a large part of Russia.
The principle was that each household of the village was entitled
to a share of the village-lands proportioned to the number of
adult males it contained. Every death, therefore, of a grown-up
man diminished pro tanto the share of the household, and every
member of it grown to manhood increased its lot in the cultivated
area. There was a fixed unit of acreage corresponding to the
extent of soil cultivable by one man's labour, and at the
periodical division each household obtained just as much land as
answered to its number of adult labouring men. The principal
distinction between this system and that which seemed so
monstrous and unnatural to Sir John Davis is, that under the
first the re-division took place, not as each death occurred, but
at stated intervals. I must not, indeed, be understood to say
that I think the distinction unimportant. It is very possible
that re-distributions at deaths of a common fund may mark a more
advanced stage in the history of Property than periodical
redistribution, and that the recognition of interests for an
entire life may have preceded and paved the way for the final
allotment of permanent shares to separate households. Until,
however, this last point has been reached, all the modes of
re-division known to us are plainly referable to the same
principle.
    The difficulty suggested by the recital in the 'Case of
Gavelkind' is thus not a difficulty in believing it if it stood
by itself, or if it were made with less generality. But it is
distinctly stated that all the lands in Ireland which did not
descend by the rule of Tanistry descended by the rule of
Gavelkind. The indications of the state of law or custom
furnished by the Brehon tracts certainly seem to me inconsistent
with this assertion. They show us proprietary rights defined with
a sharpness and guarded with a jealousy which is hard to
reconcile with the degree of 'natural communism' implied in the
language of Davis's Report. The Corus Bescna, of which I said
something before, and which deals with rights over tribal lands,
implies that under certain circumstances they might be
permanently alienated, at all events to the Church; and we shall
presently have to discuss, some very singular rules of
succession, which, however they may affect the Family, certainly
seem to exclude the Sept. Dr Sullivan, who appears to have
consulted many more original authorities than have been
translated or given to the world, expresses himself as if he
thought that the general law of succession in Ireland was newly
analogous to the Gavelkind of Kent. 'According to the Irish
custom, property descended at first only to the male heirs of the
body, each son receiving an equal share..... Ultimately, however,
daughters appear to have become entitled to inherit all, if there
were no sons' (Introd., p. clxx).
    I do not expect that the apparent contradiction between the
Brehon tracts and the language of Davis and his contemporaries
respecting the Irish law of succession to land will be fully
accounted for till the whole of the ancient legal literature is
before the world; but meanwhile it is a plausible explanation of
the discrepancy that the Irish and the English writers attended
to different sets of phenomena. I cannot doubt that the so-called
Irish Gavelkind was found over a great part of the country. The
statements of English authorities on the point are extremely
precise. They affirm that 'no civil habitations were erected, and
no enclosure or improvement was made of land where Gavelkind was
in use,' and they say that this was especially the case in
Ulster, 'which was all one wilderness.' Nevertheless it is
extremely probable that another set of facts justified the
indications given by the Brehon tracts, and that there were other
modes of succession known besides succession by Tanistry on the
one hand, and besides on the other hand the peculiarly archaic
system under which each lapsed share was at once divided between
all the members of the Sept. Such an institution as the last,
though exceptional circumstances may keep it alive, contains
within itself a principle of decay. Each household included in
the Joint Family gains a firmer hold on its share of the lands as
the distance increases from the common ancestor; and finally
appropriates it, transmitting it exclusively to offshoots from
its own branch. Nothing is more likely than that there were
frequent examples of Irish septs with their land-customs in this
condition; and it is still more probable that usages of a
similarly modern stamp prevailed in estates permanently severed
or 'booked off' from tribal possession or established at a
distance from the main seat of the tribe. It is true that, in
society based on kinship, each family separated from the rest
tends itself to expand into a joint family or sept; but in these
severed estates custom would be apt to be enfeebled and to abate
something of its tyranny. Thus, putting the rule of Tanistry
aside, I can quite conceive that the Irish Gavelkind, the modern
Gavelkind known to Kent, and many forms of succession
intermediate between the two, co-existed in Ireland. Both the
English and the Irish authorities on law had prejudices of their
own which might lead them to confine their attention to
particular usages. The Brehon writers seem to me distinctly
biassed in favour of the descent of property in individual
families, which commended itself to them as lawyers, as friends
of the Church, and (it may be) as well-wishers to their country.
On the other, the strange ancient form of ownership which he
called Gavelkind would fascinate the observation of an Englishman
resident in Ireland. He would assuredly have none of the
curiosity about it which we feel nowadays, but surprise and
dislike would fix his attention upon it, and perhaps prevent his
recognising the comparatively wide diffusion of institutions of
the opposite type.
    This interpretation of the seeming contradiction between our
authorities is consistent with the very little we know respecting
actual divisions of land in ancient Ireland. It constantly
happened both in Ireland and the Scottish Highlands that a Chief,
besides the domain which appertained to his office, had a great
estate held under what the English lawyers deemed the inferior
tenure. There are two cases on record in which Irish Chiefs of
considerable dignity distributed such estates among their
kindred. In the fourteenth century Connor More O'Brien, a chief
who had children of his own, is stated to have divided his land
on principles which must have more or less corresponded to those
condemned by the Anglo-Irish Judges. The bulk of the estate he
assigned to the various families of the Sept formed by his own
relatives. To himself he reserved only one-sixth of one-half of
one-third, and even this sixth he divided between his three sons,
reserving only a rent to himself. But at the end of the fifteenth
century Donogh O'Brien, son of Brien Duff, son of Connor, King of
Thomond, divided all his lands between his eleven sons, reserving
to himself only the mansion and the demesne in its vicinity. The
difference between the two cases, which (it is instructive to
observe) are separated by at least a century, appears to me
sufficiently plain. In the first the land had remained in a state
of indivision during several generations; in the second it had
been periodically divided. Connor More O'Brien was distributing
the inheritance of a joint family; Donogh O'Brien that of a
family (Vallancey, 'Collectanea de Rebus Hibernicis,' i 264,
265.)
    It is worthy of observation that in the more ancient example
Connor More O'Brien appears to have paid regard to the various
stirpes or stocks into which the descendants of the orIginal
founder of his family had branched out. The principle he followed
I suppose to be the same as that pointed out by Davis when he
speaks of the chief dividing a lapsed share between the members
of a sept 'according to their antiquity.' The proceeding deserves
to be noted, as showing an advance on the oldest known tribal
customs. In the most archaic forms of the Joint Family, and of
the institution which grew out of it, the Village-Community,
these distributions are per capita; no one person who is entitled
takes more than another, whether the whole estate or a portion is
divided, and no respect is paid to the particular way in which a
given individual has descended from the common ancestor. Under a
more advanced system the distribution is per stirpes; careful
attention is paid to the lines into which the descendants of the
ancestor of the joint-family have separated, and separate rights
are reserved to them. Finally, the stocks themselves escape from
the sort of shell constituted by the Joint Family; each man's
share of the property, now periodically divided, is distributed
among his direct descendants at his death. At this point,
property in its modern form has been established; but the Joint
Family has not wholly ceased to influence successions. When
direct descendants fail it is even now the rules of the Joint
Family which determine the taking of the inheritance. Collateral
successions, when they are distant, follow the more primitive
form of the old institution, and are per capita; when they are
those of the nearer kindred they are adjusted to its more modern
shape, and are per stirpes.
    The remark has further to be made that both Connor O'Brien
and Donogh O'Brien divided their own land among their sons or
kindred during their own lifetime. Like Laertes in the Odyssee
and like Lear in the tragedy of Shakespeare, the old Chief, in
the decay of his vigour, parts with his power and retains but a
fraction of the property he had administered; and the poorer
freeman becomes one of those 'senior' pensioners of the tribe so
often referred to in the tracts. Precisely the same practice is
recognised, and even (as some think) enjoined, by the more
archaic bodies of Hindoo jurisprudence. The principle is that the
right of each member of a family accrues at his birth; and, as
the family has in theory a perpetual existence, there is no
particular reason why, if the property is divided at all, it
should be exclusively divided at a death. The power of
distributing inheritances vested in the Celtic chiefs has been
made the basis of some very doubtful theories, but I have no
doubt it is essentially the same institution as the humble
privilege which is reserved to the Hindoo father by the
Mitakshara. It is part of the prerogative belonging to the
representative of the purest blood in the joint family; but in
proportion at the Joint Family, Sept, or Clan becomes more
artificial, the power of distribution tends more and more to look
like mere administrative authority.
    Under some systems of Hindoo law, the father, when making a
distribution of property during his lifetime, is entitled to
retain a double share, and by some Indian customs the eldest son,
when dividing the patrimony with his brothers, takes twice at
much as the others. There are a good many traces of the usage in
this last form in a variety of communities. It is, for instance,
the 'birthright' of the Hebrew patriarchal history. I mention it
particularly because it seems to me to be sometimes improperly
confounded with the right conferred by what we call the rule of
Primogeniture. But the double share is rather given as the reward
or (perhaps we should say) the security for impartial
distribution, and we find it often coupled with the right to take
exclusively such things as are deemed incapable of partition, the
family house, for instance, and certain utensils. The proof that
it is not essentially a privilege of the eldest son, we find in
the circumstances that it is sometimes enjoyed by the father and
sometimes by the youngest of the sons, and in this way it is
connected with our own custom of Borough English, of which I
shall have more to say presently. There is a difference of
historical origin between this kind of privileged succession and
that which we call Primogeniture. The first is descended from a
custom of the Tribe; the last, to which I now pass, seems to me
traceable to the special position of the Chief.
    The Brehon tracts at present translated do not add much to
the knowledge which we possessed of the Irish customs
corresponding to the usage of exclusive succession by the eldest
son; and Primogeniture remains what I called it thirteen years
ago ('Ancient Law,' p. 227), 'one of the most difficult problems
of historical jurisprudence.' The first of the difficulties which
surround it is the total absence, before a particular epoch in
history, of recorded precedents for any such mode of succession
to property. It was unknown to the Hellenic world. It was unknown
to the Roman world. It was unknown to the Jews, and apparently to
the whole Semitic world. In the records of all these societies
there are vestiges of great differences between the succession of
males and the succession of females; but there was nothing like
the exclusive succession of a single son to property, although
the descent of sovereignties to the eldest son of the last
reigning king was a familiar fact, and though the Greek
philosophers had conjectured that, in an earlier state of society
than theirs, the smaller groups of men -- families and villages
-- had been governed by eldest son after eldest son.
    Even when the Teutonic races spread over Western Europe they
did not bring with them Primogeniture as their ordinary rule of
succession. The allodial property of the Teutonic freeman, that
share which he had theoretically received at the original
settlement of the brotherhood to which he belonged on their
domain, was divided at his death, when it was divided at all,
equally between his sons or equally between his sons and
daughters. It is quite certain, however, that the appearance of
Primogeniture in the West and its rapid diffusion must be
connected with the irruption of the barbarians, and with the
tribal ideas re-introduced by them into the Roman world. At this
point, however, we encounter another difficulty. The
Primogeniture which first meets us is not uniformly the
Primogeniture with which we are now familiar. The right of the
eldest son sometimes gives way to the right of the eldest male
relative of the deceased, and occasionally it seems as if neither
the succession of the eldest son nor that of the eldest relative
could take effect without election or confirmation by the members
of the aggregate group to which both belong.
    As usual, we have to look for living illustrations of the
ancient system to the usages of the Hindoos. The Family,
according to the Hindoo theory, is despotically governed by its
head; but if he dies and the Family separates at his death, the
property is equally divided between the sons. If, however, the
Family does not separate, but allows itself to expand into a
Joint Family, we have the exact mixture of election and doubtful
succession which we find in the early examples of European
primogeniture. The eldest son, and after him his eldest son, is
ordinarily the manager of the affairs of the Joint Family, but
his privileges theoretically depend on election by the
brotherhood, and may be set aside by it, and, when they are set
aside, it is generally in favour of a brother of the deceased
manager, who, on the score of greater age, is assumed to be
better qualified than his nephew for administration and business.
In ancient Irish society the Joint Family, continued through many
generations, has grown first into the Sept and then into the
Clan, contracting a greater degree of artificiality in proportion
to its enlargement. The importance, meanwhile, of the Chief to
the Tribe has rather increased than diminished, since he is no
longer merely administrator of its civil affairs but its leader
in war. The system produced from these elements appears to me
sufficiently intelligible. The veneration of the Tribe is not
attracted by individuals of the Chieftain's family, but by the
family itself, as representing the purest blood of the entire
brotherhood. It chooses its head and leader (save on the very
rarest occasions) from this family, and there are instances of
the choice being systematically made from two families in
alternation. But the necessity of having a military leader in the
vigour of his physical and mental powers is much too imperious to
admit of his choice being invariably deferred to the death of the
ruling Chief, or to allow of the election falling universally or
even generally on his son. 'It is a custom among all the Irish,'
says Spenser, 'that presently after the death of any of their
chief lords or captains, they do presently assemble themselves to
a place generally appointed and known unto them to choose another
in his stead, where they do nominate and elect for the most part,
not the eldest son, nor any of the children of the lord deceased,
but the next to him of blood that is eldest and worthiest, as
commonly the next brother if he have any, or the next cousin, and
so forth, as any is elder in that kindred or sept; and then, next
to him, they choose the next of the blood to be Tanaist, who
shall succeed him in the said Captaincy if he live thereunto....
For when their Captain dieth, if the Signory should descend to
his child, and he perhaps an infant, another might peradventure
step in between or thrust him out by strong hand being then
unable to defend his right and to withstand the force of a
forreiner; and therefore they do appoint the eldest of the kin to
have the Signory, for that commonly he is a man of stronger years
and better experience to maintain the inheritance and to defend
the country.... And to this end the Tanaist is always ready
known, if it should happen to the Captain suddenly to die, or to
be slain in battle, or to be out of the country, to defend and
keep it from all such dangers.' (Spenser's 'View of the State of
Ireland.')
    Primogeniture, therefore, considered as a rule of succession
to property, appears to me to be a product of tribal leadership
in its decay. Some such system as that represented by the Irish
Tanistry belonged probably at one time to all the tribal
communities which overran the Roman Empire, but no precise
assertion can be made as to the stage in their history at which
it began to be modified, especially since Sohm's investigations
(in his 'Fränkische Reichs-und Gerichtsverfassung') have shown us
how considerably the social organisation of some of these
communities had been affected by central or royal authority in
the interval between the observations of Tacitus and the writing
of the Salic Law. But I think we may safely conjecture that the
transition from the older to the newer Primogeniture took place
everywhere under circumstances nearly the reverse of those which
kept Tanistry so long alive in Ireland. Wherever some degree of
internal peace was maintained during tolerably long periods of
time, wherever an approach was made to the formation of societies
of the distinctive modern type, wherever military and civil
institutions began to group themselves round the central
authority of a king, the value of strategical capacity in the
humbler chiefs would diminish, and in the smaller brotherhoods
the respect for purity of blood would have unchecked play. The
most natural object of this respect is he who most directly
derives his blood from the last ruler, and thus the eldest son,
even though a minor, comes to be preferred in the succession to
his uncle; and, in default of sons, the succession may even
devolve on a woman. There are not a few indications that the
transformation of ideas was gradual. The disputes among great
Highland families about the title to the chieftaincy of
particular clans appear to date from a period when there was
still a conflict between the old principle of succession and the
new; and at a relatively later period, when throughout most of
Western Europe tribal customs have been replaced by feudal rules,
there is a visible uncertainty about such of these rules as
affect succession. Glanville, writing of English military tenures
in the later part of the reign of Henry the Second, observes:
'When anyone dies, leaving a younger son and a grandson, the
child of his eldest son, great doubt exists as to which of the
two the law prefers in the succession to the other, whether the
son or the grandson. Some think the younger son has more right to
the inheritance than the grandson... but others incline to think
that the grandson ought to be preferred to his uncle.'
(Glanville, vii. 7.) This ancient doubt has left traces of itself
on literature no less than on history, since it manifestly
affects the plot of Shakespeare's Hamlet; but the very question
of principle arose between the descendants of daughters in the
controversy between Bruce and Baliol. The succession to the Crown
of Scotland was ultimately settled, as it would have been in
earlier times, by what amounted to national election, but the
decision of Edward the First in favour of Baliol was undoubtedly
in accordance with principles which were gaining ground
everywhere, and I quite agree with Mr Burton (ii. 249) that the
celebrity of the dispute and the full consideration given to it
did much to settle the rule which prevailed in the end, that the
whole of the descendants of an elder child must be exhausted
before those of the younger had a title. When, however, the
eldest son had once taken the place of his uncle as the heir to
the humbler chieftaincies, he doubtless also obtained that
'portion of land attached to the Signory or Chiefry which went
without partition to the Tanaist;' and, as each community
gradually settled down into comparative peace under royal or
central authority, this demesne, as it was afterwards called,
must have assumed more and more the character of mere property
descending according to the rule of primogeniture. It may be
believed that in this way a principle of inheritance was formed
which first of all extended from the demesne to all the estates
of the holder of the Signory, however acquired, and ultimately
determined the law of succession for the privileged classes
throughout feudalised Europe. One vestige of this later course of
change may perhaps be traced in the noble tenure once widely
extended on the Continent, and called in French 'Parage,' under
which the near kinsmen of the eldest son still took an interest
in the family property, but held it of. him as his Peers. There
were, however, other causes than those just stated which led to
the great development of Primogeniture in the early part of the
Middle Ages, but for an examination of them I may be allowed to
refer to the work of mine which I mentioned above. ('Ancient
Law,' pp. 232 et seq.)
    I do not think that the disaffirmation of the legality of
Tanistry, and the substitution for it of the rule of
Primogeniture, can justly be reckoned among the mistakes or
crimes of the English in Ireland. The practice had been
perpetuated in the country by its disorders, which preserved
little groups of kinsmen and their petty chiefs in an unnatural
vitality; and probably Sir John Davis does not speak too harshly
of it when he charges it with 'making all possessions uncertain,
and bringing confusion, barbarism, and incivility.' The decision
against the Irish Gavelkind was far less justifiable. Even if the
institution were exactly what Davis supposed it to be, there was
in.justice in suddenly disappointing the expectations of the
distant kindred who formed the sept of the last holder: but it is
probable that several different modes of succession were
confounded under the name of Gavelkind, and that in many cases a
number of children were unjustifiably deprived of their
inheritance for the advantage of one. All that can be said for
the authors of the revolution is that they seem to have sincerely
believed the mischievousness of the institutions they were
destroying; and it is some evidence of this that, when their
descendants a century later really wished to inflict an injury on
the majority of Irishmen, they re-introduced Gavelkind, though
not in its most ancient shape. They 'gavelled' the lands of
Papists and made them descendible to all the children alike.
There seems to me a melancholy resemblance between some of the
mistakes which, at two widely distant epochs, were committed by
Englishmen, apparently with the very best intentions, when they
were brought into contact with stages in the development of
institutions earlier than that which their own civilisation had
reached. Sir John Davis's language on the subject of the Irish
custom of Gavelkind might be that of an Anglo-Indian lawyer who
should violently censure the Brahminical jurists for not
confounding families with joint undivided families. I do not know
that any such mistake has been made in India, though undoubtedly
the dissolution of the Joint Family was in the early days of our
government unduly encouraged by our Courts. But there is a closer
and more unfortunate similarity between some of the English
experiments in Ireland and those tried in India. Under an Act of
the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth the Lord Deputy was empowered
to take surrenders and regrant estates to the Irishry. The Irish
lords, says Davis, 'made surrenders of entire countries, and
obtained grants of the whole again to themselves only, and none
other, and all in demesne. In passing of which grants, there was
no care taken of the inferior septs of people.... So that upon
every such surrender or grant, there was but one freeholder made
in a whole country, which was the lord himself; all the rest were
but tenants at will, or rather tenants in villenage.' There are
believed to be many indian joint-families or septs which, in
their later form of village-communities, had the whole of their
lands similarly conferred on a single family out of their number,
or on a royal tax-gatherer outside them, under the earliest
Indian settlements. The error was not in introducing absolute
ownership into Ireland or India, but in the apportionment of the
rights of which property is made up. How, indeed, this
apportionment shall be wisely and justly made, when the time has
fully come for putting individual property in the place of
collective property by a conscious act of the State, is a problem
which taxes to the utmost the statesmanship of the most advanced
era, when animated by the highest benevolence and informed with
the widest knowledge. It has been reserved for our own generation
to witness the least unsatisfactory approach which has hitherto
been made towards the settlement of this grave question in the
great measures collectively known as the enfranchisement of the
Russian serfs.
    The Irish practice of Tanistry connects itself with the rule
of Primogeniture, and the Irish Gavelkind with the rules of
succession most widely followed among both the Eastern and
Western branches of the Aryan race; but there are some passages
in the Brehon tracts which describe an internal division of the
Irish Family, a classification of its members and a corresponding
system of succession to property, extremely unlike any
arrangement which we, with our ideas, can conceive as growing out
of blood-relationship. Possibly, only a few years ago, these
passages would have been regarded as possessing too little
interest in proportion to their difficulty for it to be worth
anybody's while to bestow much thought upon their interpretation.
But some reasons may be given why we cannot wholly neglect them.
The distribution of the Irish Family into the Geilfine, the
Deirbhfine, the Iarfine, and the Indfine -- of which expressions
the three last are translated the True, the After, and the End
Families -- is obscurely pointed at in several texts of the
earlier volumes of the translations; but the Book of Aicill, in
the Third Volume, supplies us for the first time with statements
concerning it having some approach to precision. The learned
Editor of this volume, who has carefully examined them, describes
their effect in the following language: 'Within the Family,
seventeen members were organised in four divisions, of which the
junior class, known as the Geilfine division, consisted of five
persons; the Deirbhfine, the second in order; the Iarfine, the
third in order; and the Indfine, the senior of all, consisted
respectively of four persons. The whole organisation consisted,
and could only consist, of seventeen members. If any person was
born into the Geilfine division, its eldest member was promoted
into the Deirbhfine, the eldest member of the Deirbhfine passed
into the Iarfine; the eldest member of the Iarfine moved into the
Indfine; and the eldest member of the Indfine passed out of the
organisation altogether. It would appear that this transition
from a lower to a higher grade took place upon the introduction
of a new member into the Geilfine division, and therefore
depended upon the introduction of new members, not upon the death
of the seniors.' It seems an inference from all the passages
bearing on the subject that any member of the Joint-family or
Sept might be selected as the starting-point, and might become a
root from which sprung as many of these groups of seventeen men
as he had sons. As soon as any one of the sons had four children,
a full Geilfine sub-group of five persons was formed; but any
fresh birth of a male child to this son or to any of his male
descendants had the effect of sending up the eldest member of the
Geilfine sub-group, provided always he were not the person from
whom it had sprung, into the Deirbhfine. A succession of such
births completed in time the Deirbhfine division, and went on to
form the Iarfine and the Indfine, the After and the End Families.
The essential principle of the system seems to me a distribution
into fours. The fifth person in the Geilfine division I take to
be the parent from whom the sixteen descendants spring, and it
will be seen, from the proviso which I inserted above, that I do
not consider his place in the organisation to have been ever
changed. He appears to be referred to in the tracts as the
Geilfine Chief.
    The interest of this distribution of the kinsmen consists in
this: whatever else it is, it is not a classification of the
members of the family founded on degrees of consanguinity, as we
understand them. And, even if we went no farther than this, the
fact would suggest the general reflection which often occurs to
the student of the history of law, that many matters which seem
to us altogether simple, natural, and therefore probably
universal, are in reality artificial and confined to limited
spheres of application. When one of us opens his Prayer-book and
glances at the Table of Prohibited Degrees, or when the law
student turns to his Blackstone and examines the Table of
Descents, he possibly knows that disputes have arisen about the
rights and duties proper to be adjusted to these scales of
relationship, but it perhaps has never occurred to him that any
other view of the nature of relationship than that upon which
they are based could possibly be entertained. Yet here in the
Book of Aicill is a conception of kinship and of the rights
flowing from it altogether different from that which appears in
the Tables of Degrees and of Descents. The groups are not formed
upon the same principles, nor distinguished from one another on
the same principles. The English Tables are based upon a
classification by degrees, upon identity in the number of
descents by which a given class of persons are removed from a
given person. But the ancient Irish classification obviously
turns upon nothing of the sort. A Geilfine class may consist of a
father and four sons who are not in the same degree, and the
Brehon writers even speak of its consisting of a father, son,
grandson, great-grandson, and great-great-grandson, which is a
conceivable case of Geilfine relationship, though it can scarcely
have been a common one. Now, each of these relatives is in a
different degree from the others. Yet this distribution of the
family undoubtedly affected the law of inheritance, and the
Geilfine class, to our eyes so anomalous, might succeed in
certain eventualities to the property of the other classes, of
which the composition is in our eyes equally arbitrary.
    This singular family organisation suggests, however, a
question which, in the present state of enquiry on the subject
which occupies us, cannot fairly be avoided. I have spoken before
of a volume on 'Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity in the
Human Family,' published by the Smithsonian institute at
Washington. The author, Mr Lewis Morgan, is one of the
comparatively few Americans who have perceived that, if only on
the score of the plain extant evidences of the civilisation which
was once enjoyed and lost by some branches of their stock, the
customs and ideas of the Red Indians deserve intelligent study.
In prosecuting his researches Mr Morgan was struck with the fact
that the conception of Kinship entertained by the Indians, though
extremely clear and precise, and regarded by them as of much
importance, was extremely unlike that which prevails among the
now civilised races. He then commenced a laborious investigation
of the whole subject, chiefly through communications with
correspondents in all parts of the world. The result at which he
arrived was that the ideas on the subject of relationship
entertained by the human family as a whole were extraordinarily
various, but that a generalisation was possible, and that these
ideas could be referred to one or other of two distinct systems,
which Mr Morgan calls respectively the Descriptive and the
Classificatory system. The time at our command will only allow me
to explain his meaning very briefly. The Descriptive system is
that to which we are accustomed. It has come to us from the Canon
law, or else from the Roman law, more particularly as declared in
the 118th Novel of Justinian, but it is not at all confined to
societies deeply affected by Civil and Canon law. Its essence
consists in the giving of separate names to the classes of
relatives which are formed by the members of the family who are
removed by the same number of descents from yourself, the ego or
propositus, or from some common ancestor. Thus, your uncle stands
to you in the third degree, there being one degree or step from
yourself to your father or mother, a second from your father or
mother to their parents, a third from those parents to their
other children, among whom are your uncles. And 'uncle' is a
general name for all male relatives standing to you in this third
degree. The other names employed under the Descriptive system are
among the words in most common use; yet it is to be noted that
the system cannot in practice be carried very far. We speak of
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, cousin; but then we get to
great-uncle, grand-nephew, and so forth, and at length lose our
way amid complications of 'great' and 'grand' until we cease to
distinguish our distant kindred by particular designations. The
Roman technical law went considerably farther than we do with the
specific nomenclature of relatives; yet there is reason to think
that the popular dialects of Latin were more barren, and no
Descriptive system can go on indefinitely with the process. On
the other hand, the Classificatory system groups the relatives in
classes, often large ones, which have no necessary connection
with degrees. Under it a man's father and his uncles are grouped
together, sometimes his uncles on his father's side, sometimes on
the mother's side, sometimes on both; and perhaps they are all
inherently called his fathers. Similarly, a man's brothers and
all his male cousins may be classed together and called his
brothers. The effect of the system is in general to bring within
your mental grasp a much greater number of your kindred than is
possible under the system to which we are accustomed. This
advantage is gained, it is true, at the expense of the power of
discriminating between the members of the several classes, but
still it may be very important in certain states of society,
since each of the classes usually stands under some sort of
conjoint responsibility.
    I am not now concerned with the explanation of the
Classificatory system of Kinship. Mr. Morgan and the school to
which he belongs find it, as I said before, in a state of sexual
relations, alleged to have once prevailed universally throughout
the human race, and known now to occur in some obscure fragments
of it. The fullest account of the condition of society in which
these views of relationship are believed to have grown up may be
read in Mr McLennan's most original work on Primitive Marriage.
The point before us, however, is whether we have a trace of the
Classificatory system in the Irish division of the Family into
four small groups, no one of which is necessarily composed of
relatives of the same degree, and each of which has distinct
rights of its own, and stands under definite responsibilities.
Undoubtedly, the Descriptive system was that which the ancient
Irish generally followed; but still it would be an interesting,
and, in the opinion of pre-historic writers, an important fact,
if a distribution of the Family only intelligible as a relic of
the Classificatory system remained as a 'survival' among the
institutions reflected by the Brehon Laws. My own opinion, which
I will state at once, is that the resemblance between the Irish
classification of kindred and the modes of classification
described by Mr Morgan is only superficial and accidental. The
last explanation Mr. Morgan would admit of the remarkable ideas
concerning kinship which form the subject of his book would be
that they are connected with the Patria Potestas, that famous
institution which held together what he and his school consider
to be a relatively modern form of the Family. I think, however, I
can assign some at least plausible reasons for believing that
this perplexing four-fold division of the Celtic Family is
neither a mere survival from immemorial barbarism nor, as most
persons who have noticed it have supposed, a purely arbitrary
arrangement, but a monument of that Power of the Father which is
the first and greatest land -mark in the course of legal history.
    Let me repeat that the Irish Family is assumed to consist of
three groups of four persons and one group of five persons. I
have already stated that I consider the fifth person in the group
of five to be the parent from whom all the other members of the
four divisions spring, or with whom they are connected by
adoptive descent. Thus, the whole of the natural or adoptive
descendants are distributed into four groups of four persons
each, their rank in the Family being in the inverse order of
their seniority. The Geilfine group is several times stated by
the Brehon lawyers to be at once the highest and the youngest.
    Now, Mr Whitley Stokes has conveyed to me his opinion that
'Geilfine, means 'hand-family.' As I have reason to believe that
a different version of the term has been adopted by eminent
authority, I will give the reasons for Mr Stokes's view. 'Gil'
means 'hand' -- this was also the rendering of O'Curry -- and it
is, in fact, the Greek word cheir. In several Aryan languages the
term signifying 'hand' is an expressive equivalent for Power, and
specially for Family or Patriarchal Power. Thus, in Greek we have
upocheirios and cherus, for the person under the hand. In Latin
we have herus 'master,' from an old word, cognate to cheir; and
we have also one of the cardinal terms of ancient Roman Family
Law, manus, or hand, in the sense of Patriarchal authority. In
Roman legal phraseology, the wife who haS become in law her
husband's daughter by marriage is in manu. The son discharged
from Paternal Power is emancipated. The free person who has
undergone mancipation is in mancipio. In the Celtic languages we
have, with other words, 'Gilla,' a servant, a word familiar to
sportsmen and travellers in the Highlands and to readers of Scott
in its Anglicised shape, 'Gillie.'
    My suggestion, then, is that the key to the Irish
distribution of the Family, as to so many other things in ancient
law, must be sought in the Patria Potestas. It seems to me to be
founded on the order of emancipation from Paternal authority. The
Geilfine, the Hand-family, consists of the parent and the four
natural or adoptive sons immediately under his power. The other
groups consist of emancipated descendants, diminishing in dignity
in proportion to their distance from the group which, according
to archaic notions, constitutes the true or representative
family.
    The remains which we possess of the oldest Roman law point to
a range of ideas very similar to that which appears to have
produced the Irish institution. The Family under Patria Potestas
was, with the Pater-Familias, the true Roman Family. The children
who were emancipated from Paternal Power may have gained a
practical advantage, but they undoubtedly lost in theoretical
dignity. They underwent that loss of status which in ancient
legal phraseology was called a capitis deminutio. We know too
that, according to primitive Roman law, they lost all rights of
inheritance, and these were only gradually restored to them by a
relatively modern institution, the Equity of the Roman Praetor.
Nevertheless there are hints on all sides that, as a general
rule, sons as they advanced in years were enfranchished from
Paternal Power, and no doubt this practice supplies a partial
explanation of the durability of the Patria Potestas as a Roman
institution. The statements, therefore, which we find concerning
the Celtic Family would not be very untrue of the Roman. The
youngest children were first in dignity.
    Of course I am not contending for an exact resemblance
between the ancient Roman and ancient Celtic Family. We have no
trace of any systematised discharge of the sons from the Roman
Patria Potestas; their enfranchisement seems always to have been
dependent on the will of the Pater-Familias. The divisions of the
Celtic Family seem, on the other hand, to have been determined by
a self-acting principle. An even more remarkable distinction is
suggested by passages in the Book of Aicill which seem to show
that the parent, who retained his place in the Geilfine group,
might himself have a father alive. The peculiarity, which has no
analogy in ancient Roman law, may possibly have its explanation
in usages which many allusions in the Brehon law show to have
been followed by the Celts, as they were by several other ancient
societies. The older members of the Family or Joint Family seem
in advanced age to have become pensioners on it, and, like
Laertes in the Odyssee, to have vacated their privileges of
ownership or of authority. On such points, however, it is safest
to suspend the judgment till the Brehon law has been more
thoroughly and critically examined.
    At the date at which the Book of Aicill was put together the
Irish division of the Family seems only to have had importance in
the law of succession after death. This, however, is the rule in
all societies. When the ancient constitution of the Family has
ceased to affect anything else, it affects inheritance. All laws
of inheritance are, in fact, made up of the débris of the various
forms which the Family has assumed. Our system of succession to
personalty, and the whole French law of inheritance, are derived
from Roman law, which in its latest condition is a mixture of
rules having their origin in successive ascertainable stages of
the Roman Family, and is a sort of compromise between them.
    The authors of the Brehon Law Tracts frequently compare the
Geilfine division of the Family to the human hand, but with them
the comparison has at first sight the air of being purely
fanciful. The Geilfine group has five members, and the hand has
five fingers. Dr Sullivan -- who, however, conceives the Geilfine
in a way materially different from the authorities whom I follow
-- tells us that 'as they represented the roots of the spreading
branches of the Family, they were called the cuic mera na Fine,
or the 'five fingers of the Fine.' If the explanation of
'Geilfine' which I have partly taken from Mr Whitley Stokes be
correct, we must suppose that, at the time at which the Brehon
tracts were thrown into their present form, the Patria Potestas
of the ancient Irish, though frequently referred to in the tracts
as the father's power of 'judgment, proof, and witness, over his
sons, had nevertheless considerably decayed, as it is apt to do
in all societies under unfavourable circumstances, and that with
this decay the association of the Geilfine group with 'hand' in
the sense of Paternal Power had also become faint. There is,
however, a real connection of another kind between the Geilfine
group and the five fingers of the hand. If you ask why in a large
number of ancient societies Five is the representative number, no
answer can be given except that there are five fingers on the
human hand. I commend to your attention on this point Mr Tylor's
most instructive chapter on the infancy of the Art of Counting,
in the first volume of his 'Primitive Culture.'
'Finger-counting,' he observes, 'is not only found among savages
and uneducated men, carrying on a part of their mental operations
where language is only partly able to follow it, but it also
retains a place and an undoubted use among the most cultured
nations as a preparation and means of acquiring higher
arithmetical methods, (I. 246.) Five is thus a primitive natural
maximum number. You will recollect that the early English
Township was represented by the Reeve and the four men. The
Council of an indian Village Community most commonly consists of
five persons, and throughout the East the normal number of a Jury
or Board of arbitrators is always five -- the punchayet familiar
to all who have the smallest knowledge of India. The Geilfine,
the representative group of the Irish Family, consisting of the
Parent and the four descendants still retained under his Patria
Potestas, falls in with this widely extended conception of
representation.
    The Patria Potestas seems to me the most probable source of a
well-known English custom which has occasioned no little surprise
to students of our law. 'Borough English,' under which the
youngest son and not the eldest succeeds to the burgage-tenements
of his father, has from time immemorial being recognised as a
widely disused usage of which it is the duty of our Courts to
take judicial notice, and many writers on our real property laws,
from Littleton downwards, have attempted to account for it.
Littleton thought he saw its origin in the tender age of the
youngest son, who was not so well able to help himself as the
rest of the brethren. Other authors, as Blackstone tells us,
explained it by a supposed right of the Seigneur or lord, now
very generally regarded as apocryphal, which raised a presumption
of the eldest son's illegitimacy. Blackstone himself goes as far
a-field as North-Eastern Asia for an explanation. He quotes from
Duhalde the statement that the custom of descent to the youngest
son prevails among the Tartars. 'That nation,' he says, 'is
composed totally of shepherds and herdsmen; and the elder sons,
as soon as they are capable of leading a pastoral life, migrate
from their father with a certain allotment of cattle, and go to
seek a new habitation. The youngest son, therefore, who continues
longest with the father, is naturally the heir of his house, the
rest being already provided for. And thus we find that, among
many other Northern nations, it was the custom for all the sons
but one to migrate from the father, which one now became his
heir.' The explanation was really the best which could be given
in Blackstone's day, but it was not necessary to go for it so far
from home. It is a remarkable circumstance that an institution
closely resembling Borough English is found in the Laws of Wales,
giving the rule of descent for all cultivating villeins. 'Cum
fratres inter se dividant haereditatem,' says a rule of that
portion of the Welsh Law which has survived in Latin; 'junior
debet habere tygdyn, i. e. aedificia patris sui, et octo acras de
terr*, si habuerint, (L. Wall., vol. ii. p. 780). And, when the
youngest son has had the paternal dwelling-house, eight acres of
land and certain tools and utensils, the other sons are to divide
what remains. It appears to me that the institution is founded on
the same ideas as those which gave a preference to the Geilfine
division of the Celtic family. The home-staying, unemancipated
son, still retained under Patria Potestas, is preferred to the
others. If this be so, there is no room for the surprise which
the custom of Borough English has excited, and which arises from
contrasting it with the rule of Primogeniture. But the two
institutions have a different origin. Primogeniture is not a
natural outgrowth of the family. It is a political not a tribal
institution, and comes to us not from the clansmen but from the
Chief. But the rule of Borough English, like the privileges of
the Geilfine, is closely connected with the ancient conception of
the Family as linked together by Patria Potestas. Those who are
most emphatically part of the Family when it is dissolved by the
death of its head are preferred in the inheritance according to
ideas which appear to have been once common to the primitive
Romans, to the Irish and Welsh Celts, and to the original
observers, whoever they were, of the English custom.

