



Lecture III







Kinship as the Basis of Society







    The most recent researches into the primitive history of



society point to the conclusion that the earliest tie which



knitted men together in communities was Consanguinity or Kinship.



The subject has been approached of late years from several



different sides, and there has been much dispute as to what the



primitive blood-relationship implied, and how it arose; but there



has been general agreement as to the fact I have stated. The



caution is perhaps needed that we must not form too loose a



conception of the kinship which once stood in the place of the



multiform influences which are now the cement of human societies.



It was regarded as an actual bond of union, and in no respect as



a sentimental one. The notion of what, for want of a better



phrase, I must call a moral brotherhood in the whole human race



has been steadily gaining ground during the whole course of



history, and we have now a large abstract term answering to this



notion -- Humanity, he most powerful of the agencies which have



brought about this broader and laxer view of kinship has



undoubtedly been Religion, and indeed one great Eastern religion



extended it until for some purposes it embraced all sentient



nature. All this modern enlargement of the primitive conception



of kinship must be got rid of before we can bring it home to



ourselves. There was no brotherhood recognised by our savage



forefathers except actual consanguinity regarded as a fact. If a



man was not of kin to another there was nothing between them. He



was an enemy to be slain, or spoiled, or hated, as much as the



wild beasts upon which the tribe made war, as belonging indeed to



the craftiest and the cruellest order of wild animals. It would



scarcely be too strong an assertion that the dogs which followed



the camp had more in common with it than the tribesmen of an



alien and unrelated tribe.



    The tribes of men with which the student of jurisprudence is



concerned are exclusively those belonging to the races now



universally classed, on the ground of linguistic affinities, as



Aryan and Semitic. Besides these he has at most to take into



account that portion of the outlying mass of mankind which has



lately been called Uralian, the Turks, Hungarians, and Finns. The



characteristic of all these races, when in the tribal state, is



that the tribes themselves, and all subdivisions of them, are



conceived by the men who compose them as descended from a single



male ancestor. Such communities see the Family group with which



they are familiar to be made up of the descendants of a single



living man, and of his wife or wives; and perhaps they are



accustomed to that larger group, formed of the descendants of a



single recently deceased ancestor, which still survives in India



as a compact assemblage of blood-relatives, though it is only



known to us through the traces it has left in our Tables of



Inheritance. The mode of constituting groups of kinsmen which



they see proceeding before their eyes they believe to be



identical with the process by which the community itself was



formed. Thus the theoretical assumption is that all the tribesmen



are descended from some common ancestor, whose descendants have



formed sub-groups, which again have branched off into others,



till the smallest group of all, the existing Family, is reached.



I believe I may say that there is substantial agreement as to the



correctness of these statements so long as they are confined to



the Aryan, Semitic, and Uralian races. At most it is asserted



that, among the recorded usages of portions of these races, there



are obscure indications of another and an earlier state of



things. But then a very different set of assertions from these



are made concerning that large part of the human race which



cannot be classed as Aryan, Semitic, or Uralian. It is, first of



all, alleged that there is evidence of the wide prevalence among



them of ideas on the subject of Consanguinity which are



irreconcileable with the assumption of common descent from a



single ancestor. Next, it is pointed out that some small,



isolated, and very barbarous communities -- perhaps long hidden



in inaccessible Indian valleys, or within the ring of a coral



reef in the  Southern Seas -- still follow practices which it



would be incorrect and unjust to call immoral, because, in the



view we are considering, they are older than morality. The



suggestion is finally made that if these practices were, in an



older stage of the world's history, very much more widely



extended than at present, the abnormal, non-Aryan, non-Semitic,



non-Uralian notions about kinship of which I have spoken would



find their explanation. If, indeed, the conclusion here pointed



at expresses the truth, and if these practices were really at one



time universal, it would be an undeserved compliment to the human



race to say that it once followed the ways of the lower animals,



since, in point of fact, all the lower animals do not follow the



practices thus attributed to them. But, whatever be the interest



of such enquiries, they do not concern us till the Kinship of the



higher races can be distinctly shown to have grown out of the



Kinship now known only to the lower, and even then they concern



us only remotely. No doubt several recent writers do believe in



the descent of one form of consanguinity from the other. Mr Lewis



Morgan, of New York, the author of a remarkable and very



magnificent volume on 'Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity in



the Human Family,' published by the Smithsonian Institute at



Washington, reckons no less than ten stages (p: 486) through



which communities founded on kinship have passed before that form



of the family was developed out of which the Aryan tribes



conceive themselves to have sprung. But Mr Morgan also says of



the system known upon the evidence actually to prevail among the



Aryan, Semitic, and Uralian divisions of mankind that (p. 469) it



'manifestly proceeds upon the assumption of the existence of



marriage between single pairs, and of the certainty of parentage



through the marriage relation.' 'Hence,' he adds, 'it must have



come into existence after the establishment of marriage between



single pairs.'



    A remark of considerable importance to the student of early



usage has now to be made respecting the bond of union recognised



by these greater races. Kinship, as the tie binding communities



together, tends to be regarded as the same thing with subjection



to a common authority. The notions of Power and Consanguinity



blend, but they in nowise SUpersede one another. We have a



familiar example of this mixture of ideas in the subjection of



the smallest group, the Family, to its patriarchal head. Wherever



we have evidence of such a group, it becomes difficult to say



whether the persons compiled in it are most distinctly regarded



as kinsmen, or as servile or semi-servile dependents of the



person who was the source of their kinship. The confusion,



however, if we may so style it, of kinship with subjection to



patriarchal power is observable also in the larger groups into



which the Family expands. In some cases the Tribe can hardly be



otherwise described than as the group of men subject to some one



chieftain. This peculiar blending of ideas is undoubtedly



connected with the extension (a familiar fact to most of us) of



the area of ancient groups of kindred by artifices or fictions.



Just as we find the Family recruited by strangers brought under



the paternal power of its head by adoption, so we find the Tribe,



or Clan, including a number of persons, in theory of kin to it,



yet in fact connected with it only by common dependence on the



Chief. I do not affect to give any simple explanation of the



subjection of the various assemblages of kindred to forms of



power of which the patriarchal power of the head of the family is



the type. Doubtless it is partly to be accounted for by



deep-seated instincts. But Mr Morgan's researches seem to me to



have supplied another partial explanation. He has found that



among rude and partially nomad communities great numbers of



kindred, whom we should keep apart in mind, and distinguish from



one another in language, are grouped together in great classes



and called by the same general names. Every man is related to an



extraordinary number of men called his brothers, to an



extraordinary number called his sons, to an extraordinary number



called his uncles. Mr Morgan explains the fact in his own way,



but he points out the incidental convenience served by this



method of classification and nomenclature. Though the point may



not at first strike us, kinship is a clumsy basis for communities



of any size, on account of the difficulty which the mind, and



particularly the untutored mind, has in embracing all the persons



bound to any one man by tie of blood, and therefore (which is the



important matter) connected with him by common responsibilities



and rights. A great extension and considerable relaxation of the



notion of kinship gets over the difficulty among the lower races,



but it may be that, among the higher, Patriarchal Power answers



the same object. It simplifies the conceptions of kinship and of



conjoint responsibility, first in the Patriarchal Family and



ultimately -- in the Clan or Tribe.



    We have next to consider the epoch, reached at some time by



all the portions of mankind destined to civilisation, at which



tribal communities settle down upon a definite space of land. The



liveliest account which I have read of this process occurs in an



ancient Indian record which has every pretension to authenticity.



In a very interesting volume published by the Government of



Madras, and called 'Papers on Mirasi Right' (Madras, 1862), there



are printed some ancient Memorial Verses, as they are called,



which describe the manner in which the Vellalee, a possibly Aryan



tribe, followed their chief into Tondeimandalam, a region roughly



corresponding with a state once famous in modern Indian history,



Arcot. There the Vellalee conquered and extirpated, or enslaved,



some more primitive population and took permanent possession of



its territory. The poetess -- for the lines are attributed to a



woman -- compares the invasion to the flowing of the juice of the



sugar-cane over a flat surface. ('Mirasi Papers,' p. 233.) The



juice crystallises, and the crystals are the various



village-communities. In the middle is one lump of peculiarly fine



sugar, the place where is the temple of the god. Homely as is the



image, it seems to me in one respect peculiarly felicitous. It



represents the tribe, though moving in a fused mass of men, as



containing within itself a principle of coalescence which began



to work as soon as the movement was over. The point is not always



recollected. Social history is frequently considered as beginning



with the tribal settlement, and as though no principles of union



had been brought by the tribe from an older home. But we have no



actual knowledge of any aboriginal or autochthonous tribe.



Wherever we have any approximately trustworthy information



concerning the tribes which we discern in the far distance of



history, they have always come from some more ancient seat. The



Vellalee, in the Indian example, must have been agriculturists



somewhere, since they crystallised at once into



village-communities.



    It has long been assumed that the tribal constitution of



society belonged at first to nomad communities, and that, when



associations of men first settled down upon land, a great change



came over them. But the manner of transition from nomad to



settled life, and its effects upon custom and idea, have been too



much described, as it seems to me, from mere conjecture of the



probabilities; and the whole process, as I have just observed,



has been conceived as more abrupt than such knowledge as we have



would lead us to believe it to have been. attention has thus been



drawn off from one assertion on this subject which may be made, I



think, upon trustworthy evidence -- that, from the moment when a



tribal community settles down finally upon a definite space of



land, the Land begins to be the basis of society in place of the



Kinship. The change is extremely gradual, and in some particulars



it has not even now been fully accomplished, but it has been



going on through the whole course of history. The constitution of



the Family through actual blood-relationship is of course an



observable fact, but, for all groups of men larger than the



Family, the Land on which they live tends to become the bond of



union between them, at the expense of Kinship, ever more and more



vaguely conceived. We can trace the development of idea both in



the large and now extremely miscellaneous aggregation s of men



combined in States or Political Communities, and also in the



smaller aggregations collected in Village-Communities and Manors,



among whom landed property took its rise. The barbarian invaders



of the Western Roman Empire, though not uninfluenced by former



settlements in older homes, brought back to Western Europe a mass



of tribal ideas which the Roman dominion had banished from it;



but, from the moment of their final occupation of definite



territories, a transformation of these ideas began. Some years



ago I pointed out ('Ancient Law,' pp. 103 et seq.) the evidence



furnished by the history of International Law that the notion of



territorial sovereignty, which is the basis of the international



system, and which is inseparably connected with dominion over a



definite area of land, very slowly substituted itself for the



notion of tribal sovereignty. Clear traces of the change are to



be seen in the official style of kings. Of our own kings, King



John was the first who always called himself King of England.



(Freeman, 'Norman Conquest,' I. 82, 84.) His predecessors



commonly or always called themselves Kings of the English. The



style of the king reflected the older tribal sovereignty for a



much longer time in France. The title of King of France may no



doubt have come into use in the vernacular soon after the



accession of the dynasty of Capet, but it is an impressive fact



that, even at the time of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew, the



Kings of France were still in Latin 'Reges Francorum;' and Henry



the Fourth only abandoned the designation because it could not be



got to fit in conveniently on his coins with the title of King of



Navarre, the purely feudal and territorial principality of the



Bourbons. (Freeman, loc. cit.) We may bring home to ourselves the



transformation of idea in another way. England was once the



country which Englishmen inhabited. Englishmen are now the people



who inhabit England. The descendants of our forefathers keep up



the tradition of kinship by calling themselves men of English



race, but they tend steadily to become Americans and Australians.



I do not say that the notion of consanguinity is absolutely lost;



but it is extremely diluted, and quite subordinated to the newer



view of the territorial constitution of nations. The blended



ideas are reflected in such an expression as 'Fatherland,' which



is itself an index to the fact that our thoughts cannot separate



national kinship from common country. No doubt it is true that in



our day the older conception of national union through



consanguinity has seemed to be revived by theories which are



sometimes called generally theories of Nationality, and of which



particular forms are known to us as Pan-Sclavism and



Pan-Teutonism. Such theories are in truth a product of modern



philology, and have grown out of the assumption that linguistic



affinities prove community of blood. But wherever the political



theory of Nationality is distinctly conceived, it amounts to a



claim that men of the same race shall be included, not in the



same tribal, but in the same territorial sovereignty.



    We can perceive, from the records of the Hellenic and Latin



city-communities, that there, and probably over a great part of



the world, the substitution of common territory for common race



as the basis of national union was slow, and not accomplished



without very violent struggles. 'The history of political ideas



begins,' I have said elsewhere, 'with the assumption that kinship



in blood is the sole possible ground of community in political



functions; nor is there any of those subversions of feeling which



we emphatically term revolutions so startling and so complete as



the change which is accomplished when some other principle --



such as that, for instance, of local contiguity -- establishes



itself for the first time as the basis of common political



action.' The one object of ancient democracies was, in fact, to



be counted of kin to the aristocracies, simply on the ground that



the aristocracy of old citizens, and the democracy of new, lived



within the same territorial circumscription. The goal was reached



in time both by the Athenian Demos and by the Roman Plebs; but



the complete victory of the Roman popular party was the source of



influences which have not spent themselves at the present moment,



since it is one of the causes why the passage from the Tribal to



the Territorial conception of Sovereignty was much more easy and



imperceptible in the modern than in the older world. I have



before stated that a certain confusion, or at any rate



indistinctness of discrimination, between consanguinity and



common subjection to power is traceable among the rudiments of



Aryan thought, and no doubt the mixture of notions has helped to



bring about that identification of common nationality with common



allegiance to the King, which has greatly facilitated the



absorption of new bodies of citizens by modern commonwealths. But



the majesty with which the memory of the Roman Empire surrounded



all kings has also greatly contributed to it, and without the



victory of the Roman Plebeians there would never have been, I



need hardly say, any Roman Empire.



    The new knowledge which has been rapidly accumulating of late



years enables us to track precisely the same transmutation of



ideas amid the smaller groups of kinsmen settled on land and



forming, not Commonwealths, but Village-Communities. The



historian of former days laboured probably under no greater



disadvantage than that caused by his unavoidable ignorance of the



importance of these communities, and by the necessity thus



imposed upon him of confining his attention to the larger



assemblages of tribesmen. It has often, indeed, been noticed that



a Feudal Monarchy was an exact counterpart of a Feudal Manor, but



the reason of the correspondence is only now beginning to dawn



upon us, which is, that both of them were in their origin bodies



of assumed kinsmen settled on land and undergoing the same



transmutation of ideas through the fact of settlement. The



history of the larger groups ends in the modern notions of



Country and Sovereignty; the history of the smaller in the modern



notions of Landed Property. The two courses of historical



development were for a long while strictly parallel, though they



have ceased to be so now.



    The naturally organised, self-existing, Village-Community can



no longer be claimed as an institution specially characteristic



of the Aryan races. M. de Laveleye, following Dutch authorities,



has described these communities as they are found in Java; and M



Renan has discovered them among the obscurer Semitic tribes in



Northern Africa. But, wherever they have been examined, the



extant examples of the group suggest the same theory of its



origin which Mr Freeman ('Comparative Politics,' p. 103) has



advanced concerning the Germanic village-community or Mark; 'This



lowest political unit was at first, here (i. e. in England) as



elsewhere, formed of men bound together by a tie of kindred, in



its first estate natural, in a later stage either of kindred



natural or artificial.' The evidence, however, is now quite ample



enough to furnish us with strong indications not only of the mode



in which these communities began, but of the mode in which they



transformed themselves. The world, in fact, contains examples of



cultivating groups in every stage, from that in which they are



actually bodies of kinsmen, to that in which the merest shadow of



consanguinity survives and the assemblage of cultivators is held



together solely by the land which they till in common. The great



steps in the scale of transition seem to me to be marked by the



Joint Family of the Hindoos, by the House-Community of the



Southern Sclavonians, and by the true Village-Community, as it is



found first in Russia and next in India. The group which I have



placed at the head, the Hindoo-Joint Family, is really a body of



kinsmen, the natural and adoptive descendants of a known



ancestor. Although the modern law of India gives such facilities



for its dissolution that it is one of the most unstable of social



compounds, and rarely lasts beyond a couple of generations,



still, so long as it lasts, it has a legal corporate existence,



and exhibits, in the most perfect state, that community of



proprietary enjoyment which has been so often observed, and (let



me add) so often misconstrued, in cultivating societies of



archaic type. 'According to the true notion of a joint undivided



Hindoo family,' said the Privy Council, 'no member of the family,



while it remains undivided, can predicate of the joint undivided



property that he, that particular member, has a certain definite



share.... The proceeds of undivided property must be brought,



according to the theory, into the common chest or purse, and then



dealt with according to the modes of enjoyment of the members of



an undivided family.' (Per Lord Westbury, Appovier v. Rama Subba



Aiyan, 11 Moore's Indian Appeals, 75.) While, however, these



Hindoo families, 'joint in food, worship, and estate,' are



constantly engaged in the cultivation of land, and dealing with



its produce 'according to the modes of enjoyment of an undivided



family,' they are not village-communities. They are only



accidentally connected with the land, however extensive their



landed property may be. What holds them together is not land, but



consanguinity, and there is no reason why they should not occupy



themselves, as indeed they frequently do, with trade or with the



practice of a handicraft. The House-Community, which comes next



in the order of development, has been examined by M. de Laveleye



(P. et 8. F. P., p. 201), and by Mr. Patterson ('Fortnightly



Review,' No. xliv.), in Croatia, Dalmatia, and Illyria, countries



which, though newer to us than India, have still much in common



with the parts of the East not brought completely under Mahometan



influences; but there is reason to believe that neither Roman law



nor feudalism entirely crushed it even in Western Europe. It is a



remarkable fact that assemblages of kinsmen, almost precisely the



counterpart of the House-Communities surviving among the



Sclavonians, were observed by M. Dupin, in 1840, in the French



Department of the Nièvre, and were able to satisfy him that even



in 1500 they had been accounted ancient. These House-Communities



seem to me to be simply the Joint-Family of the Hindoos, allowed



to expand itself without hindrance and settled for ages on the



land. All the chief characteristics of the Hindoo institution are



here -- the common home and common table, which we always in



theory the centre of Hindoo family life; the collective enjoyment



of property and its administration by an elected manager.



Nevertheless, many instructive change s have begun which show how



such a group modifies itself in time The community is a community



of kinsmen; but, though the com m on ancestry is probably to a



great extent real, the tradition has become weak enough to admit



of considerable artificiality being introduced into the



association, as it is found at any given moment, through the



absorption of strangers from outside. Meantime, the land tends to



become the true basis of the group; it is recognized as of



pre-eminent importance to its vitality, and it remains common



property, while private ownership is allowed to show itself in



moveables and cattle. In the true Village-Community, the common



dwelling and common table which belong alike to the Joint Family



and to the House-Community, are no longer to be found. The



village itself is an assemblage of houses, contained indeed



within narrow limits, but composed of separate dwellings, each



jealously guarded from the intrusion of a neighbour. The village



lands are no longer the collective property of the community; the



arable lands have been divided between the various households;



the pasture lands have been partially divided; only the waste



remains in common. In comparing the two extant types of



Village-Community which have been longest examined by good



observers, the Russian and the Indian, we may be led to think



that the traces left on usage and idea by the ancient collective



enjoyment are faint exactly in proportion to the decay of the



theory of actual kinship among the co-villagers. The Russian



peasants of the same village really believe, we are told, in



their common ancestry, and accordingly we find that in Russia the



arable lands of the village are periodically re-distributed, and



that the village artificer, even should he carry his tools to a



distance, works for the profit of his co-villagers. In India,



though the villagers are still a brotherhood, and though



membership in the brotherhood separates a man from the world



outside, it is very difficult to say in what the tie is conceived



as consisting. Many palpable facts in the composition of the



community are constantly inconsistent with the actual descent of



the villagers from any one ancestor. Accordingly, private



property in land has grown up, though its outlines are not always



clear; the periodical re-division of the domain has become a mere



tradition, or is only practised among the ruder portions of the



race; and the results of the theoretical kinship are pretty much



confined to the duty of submitting to common rules of cultivation



and pasturage, of abstaining from sale or alienation without the



consent of the co-villagers, and (according to some opinions) of



refraining from imposing a rack-rent upon members of the same



brotherhood. Thus, the Indian Village-Community is a body of men



held together by the land which they occupy: the idea of common



blood and descent has all but died out. A few steps more in the



same course of development -- and these the English law is



actually hastening -- will diffuse the familiar ideas of our own



country and time throughout India; the Village-Community will



disappear, and landed property,in the full English sense, will



come into existence. Mr Freeman tells us that Uffington,



Gillingham, and Tooting were in all probability English



village-communities originally settled by the Uffingas,



Gillingas, and Totingas, three Teutonic joint-families. But



assuredly all men who live in Tooting do not consider themselves



brothers; they barely acknowledge duties imposed on them by their



mutual vicinity; their only real tie is through their common



country.



    The 'natural communism' of the primitive cultivating groups



has sometimes been described of late years, and more particularly



by Russian writers, as an anticipation of the most advanced and



trenchant democratic theories. No account of the matter could in



my judgment be more misleading. If such terms as 'aristocratic'



and 'democratic' are to be used at all, I think it would be a



more plausible statement that the transformation and occasional



destruction of the village-communities were caused, over much of



the world, by the successful assault of a democracy on an



aristocracy. The secret of the comparatively slight departure of



the Russian village-communities from what may be believed to have



been the primitive type, appears to me to lie in the ancient



Russian practice of colonisation, by which swarms were constantly



thrown off from the older villages to settle somewhere in the



enormous wastes; but the Indian communities, placed in a region



of which the population has from time immemorial been far denser



than in the North, bear many marks of past contests between the



ancient brotherhood of kinsmen and a class of dependants outside



it struggling for a share in the land, or for the right to use it



on easy terms. I am aware that there is some grotesqueness at



first sight in a comparison of Indian villagers, in their



obscurity and ignorance, and often in their squalid misery, to



the citizens of Athens or Rome; yet no tradition concerning the



origin of the Latin and Hellenic states seems more trustworthy



than that which represents them as formed by the coalescence of



two or more village-communities, and indeed, even in their most



glorious forms, they appear to me throughout their early history



to belong essentially to that type. It has often occurred to me



that Indian functionaries, in their vehement controversies about



the respective rights of the various classes which make up the



village-community, are unconsciously striving to adjust, by a



beneficent arbitration, the claims and counter-claims of the



Eupatrids and the Demos, of the Populus and the Plebs. There is



even reason to think that one well-known result of long civil



contention in the great states of antiquity has shown itself



every now and then in the village-communities, and that all



classes have had to submit to that sort of authority which



assumed its most innocent shape in the office of the Roman



Dictator, its more odious in the usurpation of the Greek Tyrant.



The founders of a part of one modern European aristocracy, the



Danish, are known to have been originally peasants who fortified



their houses during deadly village struggles and then used their



advantage.



    Such commencements of nobility as that to which I have just



referred, appear, however, to have been exceptional in the



Western world, and other causes must be assigned for that great



transformation of the Village-Community which has been carried



out everywhere in England, a little less completely in Germany,



much less in Russia and in all Eastern Europe. I have attempted



in another work ('Village-Communities in the East and West,' pp.



131 et seq.) to give an abridged account of all that is known or



has been conjectured on the subject of that 'Feudalisation of



Europe' which has had the effect of converting the Mark into the



Manor, the Village-Community into the Fief; and I shall presently



say much on the new light which the ancient laws of Ireland have



thrown on the early stages of the process. At present I will only



observe that, when completed, its effect was to make the Land the



exclusive bond of union between men. The Manor or Fief was a



social group wholly based upon the possession of land, and the



vast body of feudal rules which clustered round this central fact



are coloured by it throughout. That the Land is the foundation of



the feudal system has, of course, been long and fully recognised;



but I doubt whether the place of the fact in history has been



sufficiently understood. It marks a phase in a course of change



continued through long ages and in spheres much larger than that



of landed property. At this point the notion of common kinship



has been entirely lost. The link between Lord and Vassal produced



by Commendation is of quite a different kind from that produced



by Consanguinity. When the relation which it created had lasted



some time, there would have been no deadlier insult to the lord



than to attribute to him a common origin with the great bulk of



his tenants. Language still retains a tinge of the hatred and



contempt with which the higher members of the feudal groups



regarded the lower; and the words of abuse traceable to this



aversion are almost as strong as those traceable to differences



of religious belief. There is, in fact, little to choose between



villain, churl, miscreant, and boor.



    The break-up of the feudal group, far advanced in most



European countries, and complete in France and England, has



brought us to the state of society in which we live. To write its



course and causes would be to re-write most of modern history,



economical as well as political. It is not, however, difficult to



see that without the ruin of the smaller social groups, and the



decay of the authority which, whether popularly or autocratically



governed, they possessed over the men composing them, we should



never have had several great conceptions which lie at the base of



our stock of thought. Without this collapse, we should never have



had the conception of land as an exchangeable commodity,



differing only from others in the limitation of the supply; and



hence, without it, some famous chapters of the science of



Political economy would not have been written. Without it, we



should not have had the great increase in modern times of the



authority of the State-one of many names for the more extensive



community held together by common country. Consequently, we



should not have had those theories which are the foundation of



the most recent systems of jurisprudence -- the theory of



Sovereignty, or (in other words) of a portion in each community



possessing unlimited coercive force over the rest -- and the



theory of Law as exclusively the command of a sovereign One or



Number. We should, again, not have had the fact which answers to



these theories -- the ever-increasing activity of Legislatures;



and, in all probability, that famous test of the value of



legislation, which its author turned into a test of the soundness



of morals, would never have been devised -- the greatest



happiness of the greatest number.



    In saying that the now abundant phenomena of primitive



ownership open to our observation strongly suggest that the



earliest cultivating groups were formed of kinsmen, that these



gradually became bodies of men held together by the land which



they cultivated, and that Property in Land (as we now understand



it) grew out of the dissolution of these latter assemblages, I



would not for a moment be understood to assert that this series



of changes can be divided into stages abruptly separated from one



another. The utmost that can be affirmed is that certain periods



in this history are distinguished by the predominance, though not



the exclusive existence, of ideas proper to them. Here, as



elsewhere, the world is full of 'survivals,' and the view of



society as held together by kinship still survives when it is



beginning to be held together by land. Similarly, the feudal



conception of social relations still exercises. powerful



influence when land has become a merchantable commodity. There is



no country in which the theory of land as a form of property like



any other has been more unreservedly accepted than our own. Yet



English lawyers live in faece feodorum. Our law is saturated with



feudal principles, and our customs and opinions are largely



shaped by them. Indeed, within the last few years we have even



discovered that vestiges of the village-community have not been



wholly effaced from our law, our usages, and our methods of



tillage.



    The caution that the sequence of these stages does not imply



abrupt transition from any one to the next seems to me especially



needed by the student of the Ancient Laws of Ireland. Dr



Sullivan, of whose Introduction to the lately published lectures



of O'Curry I have already spoken, dwells with great emphasis on



the existence of private property among the ancient Irish, and on



the jealousy with which it was guarded. But though it is very



natural that a learned Irishman, stung by the levity which has



denied to his ancestors all civilised institutions, should attach



great importance to the indications of private ownership in the



Brehon law, I must say that they do not, in my judgment,



constitute its real interest. The instructiveness of the Brehon



tracts, at least to the student of legal history, seems to me to



arise from their showing that institutions of modern stamp may be



in existence with a number of rules by their side which savour of



another and a greatly older order of ideas. It cannot be doubted,



I think, that the primitive notion of kinship, as the cement



binding communities together, survived longer among the Celts of



Ireland and the Scottish Highlands than in any Western society,



and that it is stamped on the Brehon law even more clearly than



it is upon the actual land-law of India. It is perfectly true



that the form of private ownership in land which grew out of the



appropriation of portions of the tribal domain to individual



households of tribesmen is plainly recognised by the Brehon



lawyers; yet the rights of private owners are limited by the



controlling rights of a brotherhood of kinsmen, and the control



is in some respects even more stringent than that exercised over



separate property by an indian village-community. It is also true



that another form of ownership in land, that which had its origin



in the manorial authority of the lord over the cultivating group,



has also begun to show itself; yet, though the Chief of the Clan



is rapidly climbing to a position answering to the Lordship of a



Manor, he has not fully ascended to it, and the most novel



information contained in the tracts is that which they supply



concerning the process of ascent.



    The first instructive fact which strikes us on the threshold



of the Brehon law is, that the same word, 'Fine,' or Family, is



applied to all the subdivisions of Irish society. It is used for



the Tribe in its largest extension as pretending to some degree



of political independence, and for all intermediate bodies down



to the Family as we understand it, and even for portions of the



Family (Sullivan, 'Introduction, clxii). It seems certain that



each of the various groups into which ancient Celtic society was



divided conceived itself as descended from some one common



ancestor, from whom the name, or one of the names, of the entire



body of kinsmen was derived. Although this assumption was never



in ancient Ireland so palpable a fiction as the affiliation of



Greek races or communities on an heroic eponymous progenitor, it



was probably at most true of the Chief and his house so far as



regarded the Irish Tribe taken as a political unit. But it is



probable that it was occasionally, and even often true of the



smaller group, the Sept, sub-Tribe, or Joint Family, which



appears to me to be the legal unit of the Brehon tracts. The



traditions regarding the eponymous ancestor of this group were



distinct and apparently trustworthy, and its members were of kin



to one another in virtue of their common descent from the



ancestor who gave his name to all. The chief for the time being



was, as the Anglo-Irish judges called him in the famous 'Case of



Gavelkind,' the caput cognationis.



    Not only was the Tribe or Sept named after this eponymous



ancestor, but the territory which it occupied also derived from



him the name which was in commonest use. I make this remark



chiefly because a false inference has been drawn from an



assertion of learned men concerning the connection between names



of families and names of places, which properly understood is



perfectly sound. It has been laid down that, whenever a family



and place have the same name, it is the place which almost



certainly gave its name to the family. This is no doubt true of



feudalised countries, but it is not true of countries as yet



unaffected by feudalism. It is likely that such names as



'O'Brien's Country' and 'Macleod's Country' are as old as any



appropriation of land by man; and this is worth remembering when



we are tempted to gauge the intelligence of an early writer by



the absurdity of his etymologies. 'Hibernia' from an eponymous



discoverer, 'Hyber,' sounds ridiculous enough; but the chronicler



who gives it may have been near enough the age of tribal society



to think that the connection between the place and the name was



the most natural and probable he could suggest. Even the most



fanciful etymologies of the Greeks, such as Hellespont, from



Helle, may have been 'survivals' from a primitive tribal system



of naming places. In the relation between names and places, as in



much more important matters, feudalism has singularly added to



the importance of land.



    Let me now state the impression which, partly from the



examination of the translated texts, legal and non-legal, and



partly by the aid of Dr. Sullivan's Introduction, I have formed



of the agrarian organisation of an Irish Tribe. It has been long



settled, in all probability, upon the tribal territory. It is of



sufficient size and importance to constitute a political unit,



and possibly at its apex is one of the numerous chieftains whom



the Irish records call Kings. The primary assumption is that the



whole of the tribal territory belongs to the whole of the tribe,



but in fact large portions of it have been permanently



appropriated to minor bodies of tribesmen. A part is allotted in



a special way to the Chief as appurtenant to his office, and



depends from Chief to Chief according to a special rule of



succession. Other portions are occupied by fragments of the



tribe, some of which are under minor chiefs or 'flaiths,' while



others, though not strictly ruled by a chief, have somebody of a



noble class to act as their representative. All the



unappropriated tribe-lands are in a more especial way the



property of the tribe as a whole, and no portion can



theoretically be subjected to more than a temporary occupation.



Such occupations are, however, frequent, and among the holders of



tribe-land, on these terms, are groups of men calling themselves



tribesmen, but being in reality associations formed by contract,



chiefly for the purpose of pasturing cattle. Much of the common



tribe-land is not occupied at all, but constitutes, to use the



English expression, the 'waste' of the tribe. Still this waste is



constantly brought under tillage or permanent pasture by



settlements of tribesmen, and upon it cultivators of servile



status are permitted to squat, particularly towards the border.



It is the part of the territory over which the authority of the



Chief tends steadily to increase, and here it is that he settles



his 'fuidhir,' or stranger-tenants, a very important class -- the



outlaws and 'broken' men from other tribes who come to him for



protection, and who are only connected with their new tribe by



their dependence on its chief, and through the responsibility



which he incurs for them.



    There is probably great uniformity in the composition of the



various groups occupying, permanently or temporary, the tribal



territory. Each seems to be more or less a miniature of the large



tribe which includes them all. Each probably contains freemen and



slaves, or at all events men varying materially in personal



status, yet each calls itself in some sense a family. Each very



possibly has its appropriated land and its waste, and conducts



tillage and grazing on the same principles. Each is either under



a Chief who really represents the common ancestor of all the free



kinsmen, or under somebody who has undertaken the



responsibilities devolving according to primitive social idea



upon the natural head of the kindred. In enquiries of the class



upon which we are engaged the important fact which I stated here



three years ago should always be borne in mind. When the first



English emigrants settled in New England they distributed



themselves in village communities; so difficult is it to strike



out new paths of social life and new routes of social habit. It



is all but certain that, in such a society as that of which we



are speaking, one single model of social organisation and social



practice would prevail, and none but slight or insensible



departures from it would be practicable or conceivable.



    But still the society thus formed is not altogether



stationary. The temporary occupation of the common tribe-land



tends to become permanent, either through the tacit sufferance or



the active consent of the tribesmen. Particular families manage



to elude the theoretically periodical re-division of the common



patrimony of the group; others obtain allotments with its consent



as the reward of service or the appanage of office; and there is



a constant transfer of lands to the Church, and an intimate



intermixture of tribal rights with ecclesiastical rights. The



establishment of Property in Severalty is doubtless retarded both



by the abundance of land and by the very law under which, to



repeat the metaphor of the Indian poetess, the tribal society has



crystallised, since each family which has appropriated a portion



of tribe-land tends always to expand into an extensive assemblage



of tribesmen having equal rights. But still there is a



co-operation of causes always tending to result in Several



Property, and the Brehon law shows that by the time it was put



into shape they had largely taken effect. As might be expected,



the severance of land from the common territory appears to have



been most complete in the case of Chiefs, many of whom have large



private estates held under ordinary tenure in addition to the



demesne specially attached to their signory.



    Such is the picture of Irish tribal organisation in relation



to the land which I have been able to present to my own mind. All



such descriptions must be received with reserve: among other



reasons, because even the evidence obtainable from the law-tracts



is still incomplete. But if the account is in any degree correct,



all who have attended to this class of subjects will observe at



once that the elements of what we are accustomed to consider the



specially Germanic land system are present in the territorial



arrangements of the Irish tribe. Doubtless there are material



distinctions. Kinship as yet, rather than landed right, knits the



members of the Irish groups together. The Chief is as yet a very



different personage from the Lord of the Manor. And there are no



signs as yet even of the beginnings of great towns and cities.



Still the assertion, which is the text of Dr Sullivan's treatise,



may be hazarded without rashness, that everything in the Germanic



has at least its embryo in the Celtic land system. The study of



the Brehon law leads to the same conclusion pointed at by so many



branches of modern research. It conveys a stronger impression



than ever of a wide separation between the Aryan race and races



of other stocks, but it suggests that many, perhaps most, of the



differences in kind alleged to exist between Aryan sub-races are



really differences merely in degree of development. It is to be



hoped that contemporary thought will before long make an effort



to emancipate itself from those habits of levity in adopting



theories of race which it seems to have contracted. Many of these



theories appear to have little merit except the facility which



they give for building on them inferences tremendously out of



proportion to the mental labour which they cost the builder.




















