


Lecture XI

The Early History of the Settled Property of Married Women

    The subject on which I am about to speak may perhaps convey
one lesson. It may serve as a caution against the lax employment
of the words 'ancient' and 'modern,' There are few persons, I
suppose, who, approaching the Settled Property of Married Women
without previous knowledge of its history, would not pronounce it
one of the most modern of subjects. It has given rise to vehement
controversy in our own day; some of the questions which it
suggests are not yet solved; and there are many here, I dare say,
who believe that they remember the first dawn of sound ideas on
these questions. Yet, as a matter of fact, the discussion of the
settled property of married women is a very old discussion. I do
not indeed say, considering the vast antiquity now claimed for
the human race, that our very first forefathers troubled
themselves about the matter; but nothing can be more certain than
that very soon after those divisions of mankind which were
destined to ultimate greatness are seen in possession of the
institution which was the one condition of their progress to
civilisation -- the Family -- they are discerned grappling with
the very same problem, no doubt in an early form, which we
ourselves have hardly yet succeeded in solving. This assertion, I
may observe, is less incredible to a Frenchman, or indeed to a
citizen of any Continental State, than it is possibly to an
Englishman. The law of the Continent on the proprietary relations
of husband and wife is in the main Roman law, very slightly
transmuted; and through the institutions of the Romans the
history of this branch of law may be traced to the earliest
institutions of so much of the human race as has proved capable
of civilisation.
    The Roman and Hindoo systems of law from which I propose to
illustrate my subject are very far indeed from being the only
sources from which information can be gathered concerning the
infancy of mankind, or even concerning the Aryan race of men. But
the evidence supplied by each of them is highly authentic, and,
while both of them run back to what may fairly be called a vast
antiquity, they both assume at their starting-point the existence
of the institution, by no means apparently universal among savage
men, out of which, as I said, all civilisation has grown -- the
Family. I need scarcely add that, even for historical purposes,
their value is very unequal.
    There is no history so long, so continuous, and so authentic
as that of the Roman Law; and yet it is not a little remarkable
that till about half a century ago it was systematically treated,
except by a small minority of jurists, as if it had no history at
all. This was a consequence of its great juridical perfection.
Let me pause to observe that, considering the time and pains
spent in acquiring the Latin language, it is much to be regretted
that so little is known of the chief branch of Latin literature.
For it is really so expressed, and so put together, as to deserve
the name of literature. Moreover, it was the only literature of
the Romans which has any claim to originality; it was the only
part of their literature in which the Romans themselves took any
strong interest; and it is the one part which has profoundly
influenced modern thought. One result, however, of its symmetry
and lucidity was that it was long regarded as a birth of pure
intellect, produced, so to speak, at a single effort. Those who
attempted to construct a history for it were few, and not of the
highest credit. But it happened that in 1816, the great German
historian, Niebuhr, travelling in Italy, had his attention
attracted at Verona to a manuscript of one of the Fathers, under
the letters of which ancient writing appeared. This manuscript,
when deciphered, proved to be a nearly perfect copy of an
educational work, written in the second century of our era, for
young Roman students of law, by one of the most famous of Roman
lawyers, Gaius or Caius. At that period Roman jurisprudence
retained enough of the traces of its most ancient state for it to
be necessary that they should be explained to young readers by
the author of such a treatise; and it thus became possible to
reconstruct, from the book of Gaius, the whole past history of
Roman law with some completeness Certainly, without Niebuhr's
discovery the subject of this lecture could never have been
understood, or its original outline restored.
    Hindoo law, which I have placed by the side of Roman law,
calls assuredly for no eulogy. It is full of monstrous
iniquities, and has been perverted in all directions by priestly
influence. But then a great deal of it is undoubtedly of
prodigious antiquity, and, what is more important, we can see
this ancient law in operation before our eyes. British
legislation has corrected some of its excesses, but its
principles are untouched, and are still left to produce some of
their results. French law, as I said, is Roman law a little
altered, but then it is the Roman law in its matured, developed,
and refined condition, and the ancient institutions of the Romans
are only seen through it dimly. But some of the institutions
which the Romans and Hindoos once had in common may be seen
actually flourishing in India, under the protection of English
Courts of Justice.
    The two societies, Roman and Hindoo, which I take up for
examination, with the view of determining some of their earliest
ideas concerning the property of women, are seen to be formed at
what for practical purposes is the earliest stage of their
history, by the multiplication of a particular unit or group, the
Patriarchal Family. There has been much speculation of late among
writers belonging to the school of so-called pre-historic inquiry
as to the place in the history of human society to which this
peculiar group, the Patriarchal Family, is entitled. Whether,
however, it has existed universally from all time -- whether it
has existed from all time only in certain races -- or whether in
the races among whose institutions it appears, it has been formed
by slow and gradual development -- it has, everywhere, where we
find it, the same character and composition. The group consists
of animate and inanimate property, of wife, children, slaves,
land, and goods, all held together by subjection to the despotic
authority of the eldest male of the eldest ascending line, the
father, grandfather, or even more remote ancestor. The force
which binds the group together is Power. A child adopted into the
Patriarchal family belongs to it as perfectly as the child
naturally born into it, and a child who severs his connection
with it is lost to it altogether. All the larger groups which
make up the primitive societies in which the Patriarchal family
occurs, are seen to be multiplications of it, and to be, in fact,
themselves more or less formed on its model.
    But, when first we view the Patriarchal Family through
perfectly trust worthy evidence, it is already in a state of
decay. The emancipation or enfranchisement of male children from
parental power by the parents' voluntary act has become a
recognised usage, and is one among several practices which
testify a relaxation of the stricter ideas of a more remote
antiquity. Confining our attention to women, we find that they
have begun to inherit a share of the property of the family
concurrently with their male relatives; but their share appears,
from several indications, to have been smaller, and they are
still controlled both in the enjoyment of it and in the disposal.
Here, however, we come upon the first trace of a distinction
which runs through all legal history. Unmarried women, originally
in no different position from married women, acquire at first a
much higher degree of proprietary independence. The unmarried
woman is for life under the guardianship of her male relatives,
whose primitive duty was manifestly to prevent her alienating or
wasting her possessions, and to secure the ultimate reversion of
these possessions to the family to whose domain those possessions
had belonged. But the powers of the guardians are undergoing slow
dissolution through the two great sapping agencies of
jurisprudence, Legal Fictions and Equity. To those who are alive
to the permanence of certain legal phenomena there is no more
interesting passage in ancient law than that in which the old
lawyer Gaius describes the curious forms with which the
guardian's powers were transferred to a trustee, whose trust was
to exercise them at the pleasure of the ward. Meantime, there can
be no reasonable doubt that among the Romans, who alone supply us
with a continuous history of this branch of jurisprudence, the
great majority of women became by marriage, as all women had
originally become, the daughters of their husbands. The Family
was based, less upon actual relationship than upon power, and the
husband acquired over his wife the same despotic power which the
father had over his children. There can be no question that, in
strict pursuance of this conception of marriage, all the wife's
property passed at first absolutely to the husband, and became
fused with the domain of the new family; and at this point
begins, in any reasonable sense of the words, the early history
of the property of married women.
    The first sign of change is furnished by the employment of a
peculiar term to indicate the relation of husband to wife, as
different from the relation of father to child, or master to
slave. The term, a famous one in legal history, is manus, the
Latin word for 'hand,' and the wife was said convenire in manum,
to come under the hand of her husband. I have elsewhere expressed
a conjectural opinion that this word manus or hand, was at first
the sole general term for patriarchal power among the Romans, and
that it became confined to one form of that power by a process of
specialisation easily observable in the history of language. The
allotment of particular names to special ideas which gradually
disengage themselves from a general idea is apparently determined
by accident. We cannot give a reason, other than mere chance, why
power over a wife should have retained the name of manus, why
power over a child should have obtained another name, potestas,
why power over slaves and inanimate property should in later
times be called dominium. But, although the transformation of
meanings be capricious, the process of specialisation is a
permanent phenomenon, in the highest degree important and worthy
of observation. When once this specialisation has in any case
been effected I venture to say that there can be no accurate
historical vision for him who will not, in mental contemplation,
re-combine the separated elements. Taking the conceptions which
have their root in the family relation -- what we call property,
what we call marital right, what we call parental authority, were
all originally blended in the general conception of patriarchal
power. If, leaving the Family, we pass on to the group which
stands next above it in the primitive organisation of society --
that combination of families, in a larger aggregate, for which at
present I have no better name than Village Community -- we find
it impossible to understand the extant examples of it, unless we
recognise that, in the infancy of ideas, legislative, judicial,
executive, and administrative power are not distinguished, but
considered as one and the same. There is no distinction drawn in
the mind between passing a law, affirming a rule, trying an
offender, carrying out the sentence, or prescribing a set of
directions to a communal functionary. All these are regarded as
exercises of an identical power lodged with some depositary or
body of depositaries. When these communities become blended in
the larger groups which are conveniently called political: the
re-combination of ideas originally blended becomes infinitely
more difficult, and, when successfully effected, is among the
greatest achievements of historical insight. But I venture to say
that, whether we look to that immortal system of village
communities which became the Greek or Hellenic world -- or that
famous group of village-communities on the Tiber, which, grown
into a legislating empire, has influenced the destinies of
mankind far more by altering their primitive customs than by
conquering them -- or to the marvellously complex societies to
which we belong, and in which the influence of the primitive
family and village notions still makes itself felt amid the mass
of modern thought -- still I venture to say, that one great
secret for understanding these collections of men, is the
reconstruction in the mind of ancient, general, and blended ideas
by the re-combination of the modern special ideas which are their
offshoots.
    The next stage in the legal history of Roman civil marriage
is marked by the contrivance, very familiar to students of Roman
law, by which the process of 'coming under the hand' was
dispensed with, and the wife no longer became in law her
husband's daughter. From very early times it would appear to have
been possible to contract a legal marriage by merely establishing
the existence of conjugal society. But the effect on the wife of
continuous conjugal society was, in old Roman law, precisely the
same as the effect on a man of continuous servile occupation in a
Roman household. The institution called Usucapion, or (in modern
times) Prescription, the acquisition of ownership by continuous
possession, lay at the root of the ancient Roman law, whether of
persons or of things; and, in the first case, the woman became
the daughter of the chief of the house; in the last case the man
became his slave. The legal result was only not the same in the
two cases because the shades of power had now been discriminated,
and paternal authority had become different from the lordship of
the master over the slave. In order, however, that acquisition by
Usucapion might be consummated, the possession must be
continuous; there was no Usucapion where the possession had been
interrupted -- where, to use the technical phrase (which has had
rather a distinguished history), there had been usurpation, the
breaking of usus or enjoyment. It was possible, therefore, for
the wife, by absenting herself for a definite period from her
husband's domicile, to protect herself from his acquisition of
paternal power over her person and property. The exact duration
of the absence necessary to defeat the Usucapion -- three days
and three nights -- is provided for in the ancient Roman Code,
the Twelve Tables, and doubtless the appearance of such a rule in
so early a monument of legislation is not a little remarkable: It
is extremely likely, as several writers on the ancient law
conjectured, that the object of the provision was to clear up a
doubt, and to declare with certainty what period of absence was
necessary to legalise an existing practice. But it would never do
to suppose that the practice was common, or rapidly became
common. In this, as in several other cases, it is probable that
the want of qualification in the clause of the Twelve Tables is
to be explained by the reliance of the legislator on custom,
opinion, or religious feeling to prevent the abuse of his
legislation. The wife who saved herself from coming under marital
authority no doubt had the legal status of wife, but the Latin
antiquaries evidently believed that her position was not at first
held to be respectable. By the time of Gaius, however, any
association of imperfect respectability with the newer form of
marriage was decaying or had perished; and, in fact, we know that
marriage, 'without coming under the hand,' became the ordinary
Roman marriage, and that the relation of husband and wife became
a voluntary conjugal society, terminable at the pleasure of
either party by divorce. It was with the state of conjugal
relations thus produced that the growing Christianity of the
Roman world waged a war ever increasing in fierceness; yet it
remained to the last the basis of the Roman legal conception of
marriage, and to a certain extent it even colours the Canon law
founded though it be, on the whole, on the sacramental view of
marriage.
    For our present purpose it is necessary to regard this newer
marriage just when it had superseded the ancient and stricter
usages of wedlock, and just before it began to be modified by the
modern and much severer principles of the Christian community.
For at this point in the history of marriage we come upon the
beginnings of that system of settling the property of married
women which has supplied the greatest part of Continental Europe
with its law of marriage settlement. It appears an immediate
consequence from thoroughly ascertained legal principles that, as
soon as the wife ceased to pass by marriage into her husband's
family, and to become in law his daughter, her property would no
longer be transferred to him. In the earlier period of Roman law,
this property, present and prospective, would have remained with
her own family, and, if she was no longer under direct parental
authority, would have been administered by her guardians for the
behoof of her male relatives. As we know, however, and as I
before stated, the power of guardians was gradually reduced to a
shadow. The legal result would seem to have been that the woman
would be placed in the same position as a French wife at this day
under what the French Code calls the régime of biens séparés, or
as an English wife whose property has been secured to her
separate use by an appropriate marriage settlement or by the
operation of the new Married Women's Property Act. But, though
this was the legal consequence, it would be a social anachronism
to assume that in practice it followed rapidly or generally. The
original object of the marriage 'without coming under the hand'
was doubtless to prevent the acquisition of excessive proprietary
power by the husband, not to deprive him of all such power, and
indeed the legal result of this marriage, unless practically
qualified in some way, would unquestionably have been far in
advance of social feeling. Here, then, we come upon an
institution which, of all purely artificial institutions, has had
perhaps the longest and the most important history. This is the
dos, or dotal estate, something very different from our 'dower.'
It has become the dot of French law, and is the favourite form of
settling the property of married women all over the Continent of
Europe. It is a contribution by the wife's family, or by the wife
herself, intended to assist the husband in bearing the expenses
of the conjugal household. Only the revenue belonged to the
husband, and many minute rules, which need not be specified here,
prevented him from spending it on objects foreign to the purpose
of the settlement. The corpus or capital of the settled property
was, among the Romans (as now in France), incapable of
alienation, unless with the permission of a court of justice. If
any part of the wife's property was not settled on her as dos, it
became her parapherna. Parapherna means something very different
from our 'paraphernalia,' and is the biens separés of French law.
It was that portion of a wife's property which was held by her
under the strict law applicable to a woman marrying without
'coming under the hand.' The authority of her guardians having
died out, and this part of her property not having, by the
assumption, been conveyed to the husband as dos, it remained
under her exclusive control, and at her exclusive disposal. It is
only quite recently, under the Married Women's Property Act, that
we have arrived at a similar institution, since money settled to
a wife's separate use, though practically the same thing,
required a settlement to create it.
    I have now abridged a very long, and, in some portions, a
very intricate history. The Roman law began by giving all the
wife's property to the husband, because she was assumed to be, in
law, his daughter. It ended in having for its general rule that
all the wife's property was under her own control, save when a
part of it had been converted by settlement into a fund for
contributing to the expenses of the conjugal household. But, no
doubt, the exception to the general rule was the ordinary
practice. In all respectable households, as now on the Continent,
there was a settlement by way of dos. Not that we are to suppose
there was among the Romans any such form of contract as we are
accustomed to under the name of Marriage Settlement. The
mechanism was infinitely simpler. A few words on paper would
suffice to bring any part of the wife's property under the
well-ascertained rules supplied by the written law for dotal
settlements, and nothing more than these words would be needed,
unless the persons marrying wished to vary the provisions of the
law by express agreement. This simple, but most admirable,
contrivance of having, so to speak, model settlements set forth
ready made in the law, which may be adopted or not at pleasure,
characterises the French Code Napoléon, and it was inherited by
the French from the Romans.
    Warning you that the account which I have given you of the
transitions through which the Roman law of settled property
passed, is, from the necessity of the case, fragmentary, I pass
to the evidence of early ideas on our subject which is contained
in the Hindoo law. The settled property of a married woman,
incapable of alienation by her husband, is well-known to the
Hindoos under the name of Stridhan. It is certainly a remarkable
fact that the institution seems to have been developed among the
Hindoos at a period relatively much earlier than among the
Romans. But instead of being matured and improved, as it was in
the Western society, there is reason to think that in the East,
under various influences which may partly be traced, it has
gradually been reduced to dimensions and importance far inferior
to those which at one time belonged to it.
    The definition of Stridhan, or 'woman's property,' given in
one of the oldest and most authoritative of the Hindoo juridical
treatises, the Mitakshara, is as follows: 'That which is given
(to the wife) by the father, the mother, the husband, or a
brother, at the time of the wedding, before the nuptial fire.' Up
to this point, the doctrine has the concurrence of all the
schools of Hindoo law, but the compiler of the Mitakshara adds a
proposition not found elsewhere: 'also property which she may
have acquired by inheritance, purchase, partition, seizure, or
finding, is denominated by Manu and the others "woman's
property."' (Mitakshara, xi. 2.). These words, attributed, you
see, to the mythical legislator, Manu, have excited the most
vehement controversies among later Brahminical commentators, and
have caused considerable perplexity to Anglo-Indian Judges, bound
as they are to elicit consistent doctrine from the Hindoo legal
texts. 'All the property which a woman may have acquired by
inheritance, purchase, partition, seizure, or finding,' is a
comprehensive description of all the forms of property as defined
by the modes of acquisition, and, if all this be Stridhan, it
follows that the ancient Hindoo law secured to married women, in
theory at all events, an even greater degree of proprietary
independence than that given to them by the modern English
Married Women's Property Act. No doubt there is much difficulty
in understanding this. The existing Hindoo written law, which is
a mixed body of religious, moral, and legal ordinances, is
pre-eminently distinguished by the strictness with which it
maintains a number of obligations plainly traceable to the
ancient despotism of the Family, and by its excessive harshness
to the personal and proprietary liberty of women. Among the Aryan
sub-races, the Hindoos may be as confidently asserted as the
Romans to have had their society organised as a collection of
patriarchally governed families. If, then, at any early period,
the married woman had among the Hindoos her property altogether
enfranchised from her husband's control, it is not easy to give a
reason why the obligations of the family despotism were relaxed
in this one particular. In point of fact, there is no clue to the
mystery so long as we confine our attention to the Hindoo law,
and no course is open to a Judge except to take his stand on the
one ancient authority I have quoted or to follow the great bulk
of modern authorities who repudiate the doctrine of the
Mitakshara on this point. The Anglo-Indian Courts have now
substantially decided that Hindoo law (with the possible
exception of that current in Western India) limits the Stridhan
to property given to the woman at her marriage either by her
family or by her husband ('Madras High Court Reports,' iii. 312).
I think, however, that if we extend our examination to other
bodies of Aryan custom, we may partly understand the amplitude
which the Mitakshara, one of the most archaic of Hindoo
compendia, assigns to the Stridhan. A full enquiry would take me
much beyond the limits which I have proposed to myself in this
Lecture, but its results would shortly be these. Among the Aryan
communities as a whole, we find the earliest traces of the
separate property of women in the widely disused ancient
institution known as the Bride-Price. Part of this price, which
was paid by the bridegroom either at the wedding or the day after
it, went to the bride's father as compensation for the
Patriarchal or Family authority which was transferred to the
husband, but another part went to the bride herself and was very
generally enjoyed by her separately and kept apart from her
husband's property. It further appears that under a certain
number of Aryan customs the proprietary rights of other kinds
which women slowly acquired were assimilated to their rights in
their portion of the Bride-Price, probably as being the only
existing type of woman's property. The exact extent of the
separate ownership which the ancient Irish law allowed to married
women is still uncertain, but undoubtedly they had some power of
dealing with their own property without the consent of their
husbands, and this was one of the institutions expressly declared
by the Judges to be illegal at the beginning of the seventeenth
century.
    If then the Stridhan had a pre-historic origin in the
Bride-Price, its growth and decay become more intelligible. First
of all it was property conferred on the wife by the husband 'at
the nuptial fire,' as the sacerdotal Hindoo lawyers express it.
Next it came to include what the Romans called the dos, property
assigned to the wife at her marriage by her own family. The next
stage may very well have been reached only in certain parts of
India, and the rules relating to it may only have found their way
into the doctrine of certain schools; but still there is nothing
contrary to the analogies of legal history in the extension of
the Stridhan until it included all the property of a married
woman. The really interesting question is how came the law to
retreat after apparently advancing farther than the Middle Roman
Law in the proprietary enfranchisement of women, and what are the
causes of the strong hostility of the great majority of Hindoo
lawyers to the text of the Mitakshara, of which the authority
could not be wholly denied? There are in fact clear indications
of a sustained general effort on the part of the Brahminical
writers on mixed law and religion, to limit the privileges of
women which they seem to have found recognised by older
authorities. The attention of English and European students of
the Hindoo law books was first attracted to this subject by a
natural desire to scrutinise the sacred texts upon which the
Brahmin learned were in the habit of insisting in defence of the
abominable practice of Suttee or widow-burning. The discovery was
soon made that the oldest monuments of law and religion gave no
countenance to the rite, and the conclusion was at once drawn
that, even on Hindoo principles, it was an unlawful innovation.
This mode of reasoning undoubtedly gave comfort to many devout
Hindoos, whom no secular argument could have reconciled to the
abandonment of a custom of proved antiquity; but still, in itself
it was unsound. The disuse of all practices which a scholar could
show to be relatively modern would dissolve the whole Hindoo
system. These inquiries, pushed much farther, have shown that the
Hindoo laws, religious and civil, have for centuries been
undergoing transmutation, development, and, in some points,
depravation at the hands of successive Brahminical expositors,
and that no rules have been so uniformly changed -- as we should
say, for the worse -- as those which affect the legal position of
women.
    It will probably be conceded by all who have paid any
attention to our subject, that the civilised societies of the
West, in steadily enlarging the personal and proprietary
independence of women, and even in granting to them political
privilege, are only follow ing out still farther a law of
development which they have been obeying for many centuries. The
society, which once consisted of compact families, has got
extremely near to the condition in which it will consist
exclusively of individuals, when it has finally and completely
assimilated the legal position of women to the legal position of
men. In addition to many other objections which may be urged
against the common allegation that the legal disabilities of
women are merely part of the tyranny of sex over sex, it is
historically and philosophically valueless, as indeed are most
propositions concerning classes so large as sexes. What really
did exist is the despotism of groups over the members composing
them. What really is being relaxed is the stringency of this
despotism. Whether this relaxation is destined to end in utter
dissolution -- whether, on the other hand, under the influence
either of voluntary agreement or of imperative law, society is
destined to crystallise in new forms -- are questions upon which
it is not now material to enter, even if there were any hope of
solving them. All we need at present note is that the so-called
enfranchisement of women is merely a phase of a process which has
affected very many other classes, the substitution of individual
human beings for compact groups of human beings as the units of
society. Now, it is true that in the legal institutions of the
Hindoos (political institutions, I need scarcely say, for many
centuries they have had none) the despotism of the family group
over the men and women composing it is maintained in greater
completeness than among any society of similar civilisation and
culture. Yet there is abundant evidence that the emancipation of
the individual from the family had proceeded some way, even
before the country had come under the Western influences through
the British dominion. If I were to give you the full proof of
this, I should have to take you through much of the detail of
Hindoo law. I will mention one indication of it, because few are
aware that the peculiarity in question serves as a sort of test
by which we can distinguish very ancient or undeveloped from
comparatively matured and developed law.
    All beginners in law have heard of the difference between
distributing an inheritance per stirpes and distributing it per
capita. A man has two sons, one of whom has eight children, and
the other two. The grandfather dies, his two sons having died
before him, and the grandfather's property has to be divided
between the grandchildren. If the division is per stirpes the
stocks of the two sons will be kept separate, and one half of the
inheritance will be distributed between the eight grandchildren,
and the other half between the two. If the division is per capita
the property will be equally divided between the whole ten
grandchildren, share and share alike. Now the tendency of matured
and developed law is to give a decided preference to distribution
per stirpes; it is only with remote classes of relatives that it
abandons the distinctions between the stocks and distributes the
property per capita. But in this, as in several other
particulars, very ancient and undeveloped law reverses the ideas
of the modern jurist, and uniformly prefers distribution per
capita, exactly equal division between all the surviving members
of the family; and this is apparently on the principle that, all
having been impartially subject to a despotism which knew no
degrees, all ought to share equally on the dissolution of the
community by the death of its chief. A preference for division
per stirpes, a minute care for the preservation of the stocks, is
in fact very strong evidence of the growth of a respect for
individual interests inside the family, distinct from the
interests of the family group as a whole. This is why the place
given to distribution per stirpes shows that a given system of
law has undergone development, and it so happens that this place
is very large in Hindoo law, which is extremely careful of the
distinction between stocks, and maintains them through long lines
of succession.
    Let us now turn to the causes which in the Hindoo law, and in
the great alternative Aryan system, the Roman law, have
respectively led to the disengagement of the individual from the
group. So far as regards the Roman institutions, we know that
among the most powerful solvent influences were certain
philosophical theories, of Greek origin, which had deep effect on
the minds of the jurists who guided the development of the law.
The law, thus transformed by a doctrine which had its most
distinct expression in the famous proposition, 'all men are
equal,' was spread over much of the world by Roman legislation.
The empire of the Romans, for one reason alone, must be placed in
a totally different class from the Oriental despotisms, ancient
and modern, and even from the famous Athenian Empire. All these
last were tax-taking empires, which exercised little or no
interference in the customs of village-communities or tribes. But
the Roman Empire, while it was a tax-taking, was also a
legislating empire. It crushed out local customs, and substituted
for them institutions of its own. Through its legislation alone
it effected so great an interruption in the history of a large
part of mankind, nor has it had any parallel except -- and the
comparison is very imperfect -- the modern British Empire in
India. There is no reason to suppose that philosophical theory
had any serious influence on the jurisprudence of the Hindoos. I
speak with reserve on the subject, but I believe that none of the
remarkable philosophical theories which the genius of the race
produced are founded on a conception of the individual as
distinct from that of the group in which he is born. From those
of them with which I happen to be acquainted, I should say that
their characteristics are of exactly the reverse order, and that
they have their nearest counterpart in certain philosophical
systems of our own day, under which the individual seems lost in
some such conception as that of Humanity. What, then, was the
influence (for some influence there certainly was) which,
operating on the minds of the Brahminical jurists, led them to
assign to the individual rights distinct from those which would
have belonged to him through mere membership in the family group?
I conceive that it was the influence of Religion. Wherever among
any part of Hindoo society there prevailed the conviction of
responsibility after death -- whether that responsibility was to
be enforced by direct rewards and punishments, or through the
stages of the metempsychosis -- the conception of the individual,
who was to suffer separately and enjoy separately, was
necessarily realised with extreme distinctness.
    The portions of the race strongly affected by religious
belief of this kind were exactly those for which the Brahminical
jurists legislated, and at first they probably legislated for
these alone. But with the notion of responsibility after death
the notion of expiation was always associated. Building upon this
last notion, the Brahminical commentators gradually transformed
the whole law until it became an exemplification of what Indian
lawyers call the doctrine of Spiritual Benefit. Inasmuch as the
condition of the dead could be ameliorated by proper expiatory
rites, the property descending or devolving on a man came to be
regarded by these writers partly as a fund for paying the
expenses of the ceremonial by which the soul of the person from
whom the inheritance came could be redeemed from suffering or
degradation, and partly as a reward for the proper performance of
the sacrifices. There ought to be nothing to surprise us in the
growth of such a doctrine, since it is only distinguished, by its
logical completeness, from one which had great influence on
Western jurisprudence. The interest which from very early times
the Church claimed in the moveable or personal property of
deceased persons is best explained by its teaching that the first
and best destination of a dead man's goods was to purchase masses
for his soul, and out of this view of the proper objects of
wealth the whole testamentary and intestate jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Courts appears to have grown. But in India the law
constructed on these principles became extremely unfavourable to
the ownership of property by women, apparently because its
priestly authors thought that women, through their physical
weakness and their seclusion (which was doubtless regarded as
unavoidable), would have much greater difficulty than men, amid a
society always more or less disturbed, in applying a proper share
of the property to the funeral ceremonies of the person who had
transmitted it. The reasoning on the subject current even in
comparatively ancient times is thus given in the Mitakshara; 'The
wealth of a regenerate man is designed for religious uses, and a
woman's succession to such property is unfit because she is not
competent to the performance of religious rites.' The compiler of
the Mitakshara who has preserved the liberal rule as to Stridhan
which I before referred to, combats this doctrine, not, however,
by affirming the capacity of women for sacrifice, but by denying
that all property is intended for religious uses, and by pointing
out that certain acts which a female owner can do are of a
quasi-religious character, e.g., she may dig tanks. (Mitakshara,
ii. 1, 22, 23, 24.) And, putting him aside, the Brahminical
commentators who succeed one another in the Hindoo juridical
schools show a visibly increasing desire to connect all property
with the discharge of sacrificial duties, and with this desire
the reluctance to place property in the hands of women is somehow
connected.
    On the whole the successive generations of Hindoo lawyers
show an increasing hostility to the institution of the Stridhan,
not by abolishing it, but by limiting to the utmost of their
power the circumstances under which it can arise. Minute
distinctions are drawn between the various modes in which
property may devolve upon a woman, and the conditions under which
such property may become Stridhan made rare and exceptional. The
aim of the lawyers was to add to the family stock, and to place
under the control of the husband as much as they could of
whatever came to the wife by inheritance or gift; but whenever
the property does satisfy the multifarious conditions laid down
for the creation of the Stridhan, the view of it as emphatically
'woman's property' is carried out with a logical consistency very
suggestive of the character of the ancient institution on which
the Brahminical jurists made war. Not only has the woman
singularly full power of dealing with the Stridhan -- not only is
the husband debarred from intermeddling with it, save in extreme
distress -- but, when the proprietress dies, there is a special
order of succession to her property, which is manifestly intended
to give a preference, wherever it is possible, to female
relatives over males.
    Let me add that the account which I have given you of the
probable liberality of the Hindoo institutions to females at some
long past period of their development, and of the dislike towards
this liberality manifested by the Brahminical lawyers, is not to
be regarded as fanciful or purely conjectural, although,
doubtless, we can only guess at the explanation of it. It is
borne out by a very considerable number of indications, one of
which I mention as of great but very painful interest. The most
liberal of the Hindoo schools of jurisprudence, that prevailing
in Bengal Proper, gives a childless widow the enjoyment of her
husband's property, under certain restrictive conditions, for her
life; and in this it agrees with many bodies of unwritten local
custom. If there are male children, they succeed at once; but if
there are none the widow comes in for her life before the
collateral relatives. At the present moment, marriages among the
upper classes of Hindoos being very commonly infertile, a
considerable portion of the soil of the wealthiest Indian
province is in the hands of childless widows as tenants for life.
But it was exactly in Bengal Proper that the English, on entering
India, found the Suttee, or widow-burning, not merely an
occasional, but a constant and almost universal practice with the
wealthier classes, and, as a rule, it was only the childless
widow, and never the widow with minor children, who burnt herself
on her husband's funeral pyre. There is no question that there
was the closest connection between the law and the religious
custom, and the widow was made to sacrifice herself in order that
her tenancy for life might be got out of the way. The anxiety of
her family that the rite should be performed, which seemed so
striking to the first English observers of the practice, was, in
fact, explained by the coarsest motives; but the Brahmins who
exhorted her to the sacrifice were undoubtedly influenced by a
purely professional dislike to her enjoyment of property. The
ancient rule of the civil law, which made her tenant for life,
could not be got rid of, but it was combated by the modern
institution which made it her duty to devote herself to a
frightful death.
    If the Stridhan of the Hindoos is a form of married women's
separate property, which has been disliked and perverted by the
professional classes who had the power to modify it, the
institution which was first the dos of the Romans, and is now the
dot of Continental Europe, has received a singular amount of
artificial encouragement. I have endeavoured to describe to you
how it originated, but I have yet to state that it entered into
one of the most famous social experiments of the Roman Empire. A
well-known statute of the emperor Augustus, celebrated by Horace
in an official ode as the prince's greatest legislative
achievement, had for its object the encouragement and regulation
of marriage and the imposition of penalties on celibacy. Among
the chief provisions of this 'Lex Julia et Papia Poppoea' -- to
give its full title -- was a clause compelling opulent parents to
create portions, or dotes, for their marriageable daughters. This
provision of a statute, which very deeply affected the Roman law
in many ways, must have met with general approval, for at a later
date we find the same principle applied to the donatio propter
nuptias, or settlement on the married couple from the husband's
side. In the matured Roman law, therefore, singular as it may
seem to us, parents were under a statutory obligation to make
settlements on their children.
    It has been rather the fashion to speak of these experiments
of the Roman Emperors on public morality as if they totally
miscarried -- I suppose, from some idea that the failure added to
the credit of the moral regeneration effected by Christianity.
But, as a matter of fact, the Christian Church conferred few
civil benefits of greater moment to several generations of
mankind than in keeping alive the traditions of the Roman
legislation respecting settled property, and in strenuously
exerting itself to extend and apply the principles of these
disciplinary laws. There can be no serious question that, in its
ultimate result, the disruption of the Roman Empire was very
unfavourable to the personal and proprietary liberty of women. I
purposely say, 'in its ultimate result,' in order to avoid a
learned controversy as to their position under purely Teutonic
customs. It is very possible that the last stages of the process,
which it is difficult to call anything but feudalisation, were
more unfavourable to women than the earlier changes, which were
exclusively due to the infusion of Germanic usage; but, at any
rate, the place of women under the new system when fully
organised was worse than it was under Roman law, and would have
been very greatly worse but for the efforts of the Church. One
standing monument of these efforts we have constantly before us
in the promise of the husband in the Marriage service, 'With all
my worldly goods, I thee endow;' a formula which sometimes
puzzles the English lawyer, from its want of correspondence with
anything which he finds among the oldest rules of English law.
The words have, indeed, been occasionally used in English legal
treatises, as the text of a disquisition on the distinction
between Roman dos, to which they are supposed to refer, and the
doarium, which is the 'dower' of lands known to English law. The
fact is, however, that the tradition which the Church was
carrying on was the general tradition of the Roman dos, the
practical object being to secure for the wife a provision of
which the husband could not wantonly deprive her, and which would
remain to her after his death. The bodies of customary law which
were built up over Europe were, in all matters of first
principle, under ecclesiastical influences; but the particular
applications of a principle once accepted were extremely various.
The dower of lands in English law, of which hardly a shadow
remains, but under which a wife surviving her husband took a
third of the rents and profits of his estates for life, belonged
to a class of institutions widely spread over Western Europe,
very similar in general character, often designated as doarium,
but differing considerably in detail. They unquestionably had
their origin in the endeavours of the Church to revive the Roman
institution of the compulsory dos, which, in this sense, produced
the doarium, even though the latter may have had a partially
Germanic origin, and even though it occasionally assume (as it
unquestionably does) a shape very different from the original
institution. I myself believe that another effect of this
persistent preaching and encouragement is to be found in the
strong feeling which is diffused through much of Europe, and
specially through the Latinised societies, in favour of dotation,
or portioning of daughters, a feeling which seldom fails to
astonish a person acquainted with such a country as France by its
remarkable intensity. It is an economical power of considerable
importance, for it is the principal source of those habits of
saving and hoarding which characterise the French people, and I
regard it as descended, by a long chain of succession, from the
obligatory provisions of the marriage law of the Emperor
Augustus.
    The importance and interest of our subject, when treated in
all its bearings and throughout its whole history, are quite
enough to excuse me, I trust, for having detained you with an
account of its obscure beginnings. It has been said that the
degree in which the personal immunity and proprietary capacity of
women are recognised in a particular state or community is a test
of its degree of advance in civilisation; and, though the
assertion is sometimes made without the qualifications which are
necessary to give it value, it is very far indeed from being a
mere gallant commonplace. For, inasmuch as no class of similar
importance and extent was, in the infancy of society, placed in a
position of such absolute dependence as the other sex, the degree
in which this dependence has step by step been voluntarily
modified and relaxed, serves undoubtedly as a rough measure of
tribal, social, national capacity for self-control -- of that
same control which produces wealth by subduing the natural
appetite of living for the present, and which fructifies in art
and learning through subordinating a material and immediate to a
remote, intangible, and spiritual enjoyment. The assertion, then,
that there is a relation between civilisation and the proprietary
capacities of women is only a form of the truth that every one of
those conquests, the sum of which we call civilisation, is the
result of curbing some one of the strongest, because the primary,
impulses of human nature. If we were asked why the two societies
with which we have been concerned -- the Hindoos on the one hand,
and the Romans and all the races to which they have bequeathed
their institutions on the other -- have had so widely different a
history, no reply can be very confidently given, so difficult is
it, among the vast variety of influences acting on great
assemblages of men, to single out any one or any definite number
of them, and to be sure that these have operated more powerfully
than the rest. Yet, if it were absolutely necessary to give an
answer, it would consist in pointing to the difference in their
social history which has been the subject of this lecture, and in
observing that one steadily carried forward, while the other
recoiled from, the series of changes which put an end to the
seclusion and degradation of an entire sex.

