


Lectures on the Early History of Institutions



by Henry Sumner Maine



1875










Preface







    In the Lectures printed in this Volume an attempt is made to



carry farther in some particulars the line of investigation



pursued by the Author in an earlier work on 'Ancient Law'. The



fortunes of the legal system which then supplied him with the



greatest number of his illustrations have been strikingly unlike



those of another body of law from which he has now endeavoured to



obtain some new materials for legal and social history. The Roman



Law has never ceased to be spoken of with deep respect, and it is



in fact the source of the greatest part of the rules by which



civil life is still governed in the Western World. The Ancient



Irish Law, the so-called Brehon Law, has been for the most part



bitterly condemned by the few writers who have noticed it; and,



after gradually losing whatever influence it once possessed in



the country in which it grew up, in the end it was forcibly



suppressed. Yet the very cases which have denied a modern history



to the Brehon Law have given it a especial interest of its own in



our day through the arrest of its development; and this interest,



the Author hopes, is sufficient to serve as his excuse for making



the conclusions it suggests the principal subject of the Lectures



now published, except the last three.



    The obligations o* the Author to various Gentlemen for



instruction derived from their published writings or private



communications are acknowledged in the body of the work, but he



has to express his especial thanks to the Bishop of Limerick, and



to Professor Thaddeus O'Mahony, for facilities of access to the



still unpublished translations of Brehon manuscripts, as well as



for many valuable suggestions. 



    The Lectures (with the omission of portions) have all been



delivered at Oxford. 







        27 Cornwall Gardens, London, S.W.;



            November 1874.







Lecture One.







New Materials for the Early History of Institutions







    The sources of information concerning the early history of



institutions which have been opened to us are numerous and



valuable. On one subject in particular, which may be confidently



said to have been almost exclusively investigated till lately by



writers who had followed a false path, the additions to our



knowledge are of special interest and importance. We at length



know something concerning the beginnings of the great institution



of Property in Land. The collective ownership of the soil by



groups of men either in fact united by blood-relationships, or



believing or assuming that they are so united, is now entitled to



take rank as an ascertained primitive phenomenon, once



universally characterising those communities of mankind between



whose civilisation and our own there is any distinct connection



or analogy. The evidence has been found on all sides of us, dimly



seen and verifiable with difficulty in countries which have



undergone the enormous pressure of the Roman Empire, or which



have been strongly affected by its indirect influence, but



perfectly plain and unmistakeable in the parts of the world,



peopled by the Aryan race, where the Empire has made itself felt



very slightly or not at all. As regards the Sclavonic



communities, the enfranchisement of the peasantry of the Russian



dominions in Europe has given a stimulus to enquiries which



formerly had attractions for only a few curious observers, and



the amount of information collected has been very large. We now



know much more clearly than we did before that the soil of the



older provinces of the Russian Empire has been, from time



immemorial, almost exclusively distributed among groups of



self-styled kinsmen, collected in cultivating



village-communities, self-organised and self-governing; and,



since the great measure of the present reign, the collective



rights of these communities, and the rights and duties of their



members in respect of one another, are no longer entangled with



and limited by the manorial privileges of an owner-in-chief.



There is also fresh evidence that the more backward of the



outlying Sclavonic societies are constituted upon essentially the



same model; and it is one of the facts with which the Western



world will some day assuredly have to reckon, that the political



ideas of so large a portion of the human race, and its ideas of



property also, are inextricably bound up with the notions of



family interdependency, of collective ownership, and of natural



subjection to patriarchal power. The traces of the ancient social



order in the Germanic and Scandinavian countries are, I need



scarcely say, considerably fainter, and tend always to become



more obscured; but the re-examination of the written evidence



respecting ancient Teutonic life and custom proceeds without



intermission, and incidentally much light has been thrown on the



early history of property by the remarkable work of Sohm



('Frankische Reichs-und Gerichtsverfassung'). The results



obtained by the special method of G.L. Von Maurer have meantime



been verified by comparison with phenomena discovered in the most



unexpected quarters. The researches of M. de Laveleye, in



particular, have been conducted over a field of very wide extent;



and, although I dissent from some of the economic conclusions to



which he has been led, I cannot speak too highly of the value of



the materials collected by him, and described in the recently



published volume which he has entitled "La Propriete et ses



Formes Primitives". I have not observed that the vestiges left on



the soil and law of England and of the Scottish Lowlands by the



ancient Village-Community have been made the subject of any



published work since the monograph of Nasse on the "Land



Community of the Middle Ages" was given to the world, and since



the lectures delivered in this place three years since appeared



in print. Nobody, however, who knows the carefulness with which



an English Court of Justice sifts the materials brought before it



will wonder at my attaching a special importance to the judgment



of Lord Chancellor Hatherley, given in a difficult case which



arose through a dispute between different classes of persons



interested in a manor, Warrick against Queen's college, Oxford



(reported in 6 Law Reports, Chancery Appeals, 716). It appears to



me to recognise the traces of a state of things older than the



theoretical basis of English Real Property Law, and, so far as it



goes, to allow that the description of it given here was correct.



Meanwhile, if I may judge from the communications which do not



cease to reach me from India, and from various parts of this



country, the constitution of the Village-Community, as it exists,



and as it existed, is engaging the attention of a large number of



industrious observers, and the facts bearing upon the subject,



which I hope will some day be made public, prove to exist in



extraordinary abundance.



    There was not set of communities which until recently



supplied us with information less in amount and apparent value



concerning the early history of law than those of Celtic origin.



This was the more remarkable, because one particular group of



small Celtic societies, which have engrossed more than their



share of the interest of this country -- the clans of the



Scottish Highlands -- had admittedly retained many of the



characteristics, and in particular the political characteristics



of a more ancient condition of the world, almost down to our own



day. But the explanation is, that all Celtic societies were until



recently seen by those competent to observe them through a



peculiarly deceptive medium. A veil spread by the lawyers, a veil



woven of Roman law and of the comparatively modern combination of



primitive and Roman law which we call feudalism, hung between the



Highland institutions and the shrewd investigating genius of the



Scottish Lowlanders. A thick mist of feudal law hid the ancient



constitution of Irish society from English observation, and led



to unfounded doubts respecting the authenticity of the laws of



Wales. The ancient organisation of the Celts of Gaul, described



by Caesar with the greatest clearness and decisiveness, appeared



to have entirely disappeared from France, partly because French



society was exclusively examined for many centuries by lawyers



trained either in Roman or in highly feudalised law, but partly



also because the institutions of the Gallic Celts had really



passed under the crushing machinery of Roman legislation. I do



not, indeed, mean to say that this darkness has not recently



given signs of lifting. It has been recognized that the



collections of Welsh laws published by the Record Commission,



though their origin and date are uncertain, are undoubtedly



bodies of genuine legal rules; and, independently of the



publications to which I am about to direct attention, the group



of Irish scholars, which has succeeded a school almost infamous



for the unchastened license of its speculations on history and



philology, had pointed out many things in Irish custom which



connected it with the archaic practices known to be still



followed or to have been followed by the Germanic races. As early



as 1837 Mr W.F. Skene, in a work of much value called "The



Highlanders of Scotland", had corrected many of the mistakes on



the subject of Highland usage into which writers exclusively



conversant with feudal rules had been betrayed; and the same



eminent antiquarian, in an appendix to his edition of the



Scottish chronicler, Fordun, published in 1872, confirms evidence



which had reached me in considerable quantities from private



sources to the effect that village-communities with 'shifting



severalties' existed in the Highlands within living memory. Quite



recently, also, M. Le Play and others have come upon plain traces



of such communities in several parts of France. A close



re-examination of the Custumals or manuals of feudal rules



plentiful in French legal literature, led farther to some highly



interesting results. It clearly appeared from them that



communities of villeins were constantly found on the estates of



the French territorial nobility. The legal writers have always



represented these as voluntary associations which were rather



favoured by the lord on account of the greater certainty and



regularity with which their members rendered him suit and



service. As a rule, when a tenant holding by base tenure died,



the lord succeeded in the first instance to his land, a rule of



which there are plain traces in our English law of copyhold. But



it is expressly stated that, in the case of an association of



villeins, the lord did not resume their land, being supposed to



be compensated by their better ability to furnish his dues. Now



that the explanation has once been given, there can be no doubt



that these associations were not really voluntary partnerships,



but groups of kinsmen; not, however, so often organised on the



ordinary type of the Village-Community as on that of the



House-Community, which has recently been examined in Dalmatia and



Croatia. Each of them was what the Hindoos call a Joint Undivided



Family, a collection of assumed descendants from a common



ancestor, preserving a common hearth and common meals during



several generations. There was no escheat of the land to the lord



on a death, because such a corporation never dies, and the



succession is perpetual.



    But much the most instructive contribution to our knowledge



of the ancient Celtic societies has been furnished by the Irish



Government, in the translations of the Ancient Laws of Ireland,



which have been published at its expense. The first volume of



these translations was published in 1865; the second in 1869; the



third, enriched with some valuable prefaces, has only just



appeared. No one interested in the studies which are now



occupying us could fail to recognise the importance of the



earlier volumes, but there was much difficulty in determining



their exact bearing on the early history of Celtic institutions.



The bulk of the law first published consisted in a collection of



rules belonging to what in our modern legal language we should



call the Law of Distress. Now, in very ancient bodies of rules



the Law of Distress, as I shall endeavour to explain hereafter,



is undoubtedly entitled to a very different place from that which



would be given to it in any modern system of jurisprudence; but



still it is a highly special branch of law in any stage of



development. There is, however, another more permanent and more



serious cause of embarrassment in drawing conclusions from these



laws. Until comparatively lately they were practically



unintelligible; and they were restored to knowledge by the



original translators, Dr O'Donovan and Dr O'Curry, two very



remarkable men, both of whom are now dead. The translations have



been carefully revised by the learned editor of the Irish text;



but it is probable that several generations of Celtic scholars



will have had to interchange criticisms on the language of the



laws before the reader who approaches them without any pretension



to Celtic scholarship can be quite sure that he has the exact



meaning of every passage before him. The laws, too, I need



scarcely say, are full of technical expressions; and the greatest



scholar who has not had a legal training -- and, indeed, up to a



certain point when he has had a legal training -- may fail to



catch the exact excess or defect of meaning which distinguishes a



word in popular use from the same word employed technically. Such



considerations suggest the greatest possible caution in dealing



with this body of rules. In what follows I attempt to draw



inferences only when the meaning and drift of the text seem



reasonably certain, and I have avoided some promising lines of



enquiry which would lead us through passages of doubtful



signification.



    The value which the Ancient Laws of Ireland, the so-called



Brehon laws, will possess when they are completely published and



interpreted, may, I think, be illustrated in this way. Let it be



remembered that the Roman Law, which, next to the Christian



Religion, is the most plentiful source of the rules governing



actual conduct throughout Western Europe, is descended from a



small body of Aryan customs reduced to writing in the fifth



century before Christ, and known as the Twelve Tables of Rome.



Let it farther be recollected that this law was at first expanded



and enveloped, not at all, or very slightly, by legislation, but



by a process which we may perceive still in operation in various



communities -- the juridical interpretation of authoritative



texts by successive generations of learned men. Now, the largest



collection of Irish legal rules, which has come down to us,



professes to be an ancient Code, with an appendage of later



glosses and commentaries; and, if its authenticity could be fully



established, this ancient Irish Code would correspond



historically to the Twelve Tables of Rome, and to many similar



bodies of written rules which appear in the early history of



Aryan societies. There is reason, however, to think that its



claims to antiquity cannot be sustained to their full extent, and



that the Code itself is an accretion of rules which have



clustered round an older nucleus. But that some such kernel or



perhaps several such kernels of written law existed, is highly



probable, and it is also probable that the whole of the Brehon



law consists of them and of accumulations formed upon them. It is



farther probable that the process by which these accumulations



were formed was, as in the infancy of the Roman State, juridical



interpretation. According to the opinion which I follow, the



interesting fact about the ancient Irish law is, that this



process was exclusive, and that none of the later agencies by



which law is transformed came into play. The Brehon laws are in



no sense a legislative construction, and thus they are in no



sense a legislative construction, and thus they are not only an



authentic monument of a very ancient group of Aryan institutions;



they are also a collection of rules which have been gradually



developed in a way highly favourable to the preservation of



archaic peculiarities. Two causes have done most to obscure the



oldest institutions of the portion of the human race to which we



belong: one has been the formation throughout the West of strong



centralised governments, concentrating in themselves the public



force of the community, and enabled to give to that force upon



occasion the special form of legislative power; the other has



been the influence, direct and indirect, of the Roman Empire,



drawing with it an activity in legislation unknown to the parts



of the world which were never subjected to it. Now, Ireland is



allowed on all hands to have never formed part of the Empire; it



was very slightly affected from a distance by the Imperial law;



and, even if it be admitted that, during certain intervals of its



ancient history, it had a central government, assuredly this



government was never a strong one. Under these circumstances it



is not wonderful that the Brehon law, growing together without



legislation upon an original body of Aryan custom, and formed



beyond the limit of that cloud of Roman juridical ideas which for



many centuries overspread the whole Continent, and even at its



extremity extended to England, should present some very strong



analogies to another set of derivative Aryan usages, the Hindoo



law, which was similarly developed. The curious and perplexing



problems which such a mode of growth suggests have to grappled



with by the student of either system.



    The ancient laws of Ireland have come down to us as an



assemblage of law-tracts, each treating of some one subject or of



a group of subjects. The volumes officially translated and



published contain the two largest of these tracts, the Senchus



Mor, or Great Book of the Ancient Law, and the Book of Aicill.



While the comparison of the Senchus Mor and of the Book of Aicill



with other extant bodies of archaic rules leaves no doubt of the



great antiquity of much of their contents, the actual period at



which they assumed their present shape is extremely uncertain. Mr



Whitley Stokes, one of the most eminent of living Celtic



scholars, believes, upon consideration of its verbal forms, that



the Senchus Mor was compiled in or perhaps slightly before the



eleventh century; and there appears to be internal evidence which



on the whole allows us to attribute the Book of Aicill to the



century preceding. The Senchus Mor, it is true, expressly claims



for itself a far earlier origin. In a remarkable preface, of



which I shall have much to say hereafter, it gives an account,



partly in verse, of the circumstances under which it was drawn



up, and it professes to have been compiled during the life and



under the personal influence of St Patrick. These pretensions



have been ingeniously supported, but there is not much temerity,



I think, in refusing to accept the fifth century as the date of



the Senchus Mor. At the same time it is far from impossible that



the writing of the ancient Irish laws began soon after the



Christianisation of Ireland. It was Christianity, a 'religion of



a book', which for the first time introduced many of the ruder



nations outside the Empire to the art of writing. We cannot



safely claim for the Christian era, precisely the same degree of



culture which Caesar attributes to the Celts of the Continent in



the first century before Christ; but, even if we could do so,



Caesar expressly states of the Gauls that, though they were



acquainted with writing, they had superstitious scruples about



using written characters to preserve any part of their sacred



literature, in which their law would then be included. Such



objections would, however, necessarily disappear with the



conversion of the Irish people to Christianity. On the whole



there is no antecedent improbability in the tradition that, soon



after this conversion, the usages of the Irish began to be stated



in writing, and Celtic scholars have detected not a little



evidence that parts of these more venerable writings are imbedded



in the text of the Book of Aicill and of the Senchus Mor.



    It is extremely likely that the most ancient law was



preserved in rude verse or rhythmical prose. In the oldest Irish



traditions the lawyer is distinguished with difficulty from the



poet, poetry from literature. Both in the Senchus Mor and in the



Book of Aicill the express statement of the law is described as



'casting a thread of poetry' about it, and the traditional



authors of the Senchus Mor are said to have exhibited 'all the



judgements and poetry of the men of Erin.' Modern Irish



scholarship has, in fact, discovered that portions of the Senchus



Mor are really in verse. The phenomenon is not unfamiliar. Mr



Grote, speaking of the Elegiacs of Solon, and of the natural



priority of verse to prose, says (History of Greece, iii. 119),



'the acquisitions as well as the effusions of an intellectual



man, even in the simplest form, (then) adjusted themselves not to



the limitations of the period and semicolon, but to those of the



hexameter and pentameter.' There is no question, I conceive, that



this ancient written verse is what is now called a survival,



descending to the first ages of written composition from the ages



when measured rhythm was absolutely essential, in order that the



memory might bear the vast burdens placed upon it. It is now



generally agreed that the voluminous versified Sanscrit



literature, which embraces not only the poetry of the Hindoos,



but most of their religion, much of what stands to them in place



of history, and something even of their law, was originally



preserved by recollection and published by recitation; and even



now, in the Sanscrit schools which remain, the pupil is trained



to exercises of memory which are little short of the miraculous



to an Englishman.



    The tracts are of very unequal size, and the subjects they



embrace are of very unequal importance. But all alike consist of



an original text, divided into paragraphs. Above or over against



the principal words of the text glosses or interpretations are



written in a smaller hand, and a paragraph is constantly followed



by an explanatory commentary, also in a smaller hand, written in



the space which separates the paragraph from the next. The



scarcity of material for writing may perhaps sufficiently account



for the form taken by the manuscripts; but the Celts seem to have



had a special habit of glossing, and you may have heard that the



glosses written by early Irish monks between the lines or on the



margin of manuscripts belonging to religious houses on the



Continent had much to do with the wonderful discoveries of Zeuss



in Celtic philology. A facsimile of part of two Brehon



manuscripts, one in the British Museum, and the other in the



Library of Trinity College, Dublin, may be seen at the beginning



of the second published volume of the translations. It seems



probable that each tract was the property, and that it sets forth



the special legal doctrines, of some body of persons who, in



modern legal phrase, had perpetual succession, a Family or Law



School; there is ample evidence of the existence of such law



schools in ancient Ireland, and they are another feature of



resemblance to the India of the past and in some degree to the



India of the present.



    The text of each of the published tracts appears to have been



put together by one effort, no doubt from pre-existing materials,



and it may have been written continuously by some one person; but



the additions to it must be an accumulation of explanations and



expositions of various dates by subsequent possessors of the



document. I quite agree with the observation of the Editors,



that, while the text is for the most part comparatively



consistent and clear, the commentary is often obscure and



contradictory. Precisely the same remark is frequently made by



Anglo-Indian Judges on the Brahminical legal treatises, some of



which are similarly divided into at text and a commentary. As



regards the ancient Irish law, the result of the whole process is



anything but satisfactory to the modern reader. I do not know



that, in any extant body of legal rules, the difficulty of



mastering the contents has ever been so seriously aggravated by



the repulsiveness of the form. One of the editors has unkindly,



but not unjustly, compared a Brehon tract to the worst kind of



English law-book, without even the moderate advantage of an



alphabetical arrangement.



    The exact date at which the existing manuscripts were written



cannot be satisfactorily settled until they are all made



accessible, which unfortunately they are not at present. But we



know one MS. of the Senchus Mor to be at least as old as the



fourteenth century, since a touching note has been written on it



by a member of the family to which it belonged: "One thousand



three hundred two and forty years from the birth of Christ till



this night; and this is the second year since the coming of the



plague into Ireland. I have written this in the 20th year of my



age. I am Hugh, son of Conor McEgan, and whoever reads it let him



offer a prayer of mercy for my son! This is Christmas night, and



on this night I place myself under the protection of the King of



Heaven and Earth, beseeching that he will bring me and my friends



safe through the plague. Hugh wrote this in his own father's book



in the year the great plague."



    The system of legal rules contained in these law tracts is



undoubtedly the same with that repeatedly condemned by



Anglo-Irish legislation, and repeatedly noticed by English



observers of Ireland down to the early part of the seventeenth



century. It is the same law which, in 1367, a statute of Kilkenny



denounces as 'wicked and damnable'. It is the same law which



Edmund Spencer, in his 'View of the State of Ireland,' describes



as 'a rule of right unwritten, but delivered by tradition from



one to another, win which oftentimes there appeareth a great show



of equity, in determining the right between party and party, but



in many things repugning quite both to God's law and man's'. It



is the same 'lewd' and 'unreasonable' custom which Sir John Davis



contrasts with the 'just and honourable law of England,' and to



which he attributes such desolation and barbarism in Ireland, 'as



the like as never seen in any country that professed the name of



Christ.' It is not our business in this department of study to



enquire how far this violent antipathy was politically



justifiable. Even if the worst that has been said by Englishmen



of the Brehon law down to our own day were true, we might console



ourselves by turning our eyes to spheres of enquiry fuller of



immediate promise to the world than ours, and observing how much



of the wealth of modern thought has been obtained from the dross



which earlier generations had rejected. Meanwhile, happily, it is



a distinct property of the Comparative Method of investigation to



abate national prejudices. I myself believe that the government



of India by the English has been rendered appreciably easier by



the discoveries which have brought home to the educated of both



races the common Aryan parentage of Englishman and Hindoo.



Similarly, I am not afraid to anticipate that there will some day



be more hesitation in repeating the invectives of Spenser and



Davis, which it is once clearly understood that the 'lewd'



institutions of the Irish were virtually the same institutions as



those out of which the 'just and honourable law' of England grew.



Why these institutions followed in their development such



different paths it is the province of History to decide; but,



when it gives an impartial decision, I doubt much its wholly



attributing the difference to native faults of Irish character.



We, who are able here to examine coolly the ancient Irish law in



an authentic form, can see that it is a very remarkable body of



archaic law, unusually pure from its origin. It has some



analogies with the Roman law of the earliest times, some with



Scandinavian law, some with the law of the Sclavonic races, so



far as it is known, some (and these particularly strong) with the



Hindoo law, and quite enough with old Germanic law of all kinds,



to render valueless, for scientific purposes, the comparison



which the English observers so constantly institute with the laws



of England. It is manifestly the same system in origin and



principle with that which has descended to us as the Laws of



Wales, but these last have somehow undergone the important



modifications which arise from the establishment of a



comparatively strong central authority. Nor does the Brehon law



altogether disappoint the expectations of the patriotic Irishmen



who, partly trusting to the testimony of Edmund Spenser, the



least unkind of the English critics of Ireland, though one of the



most ruthless in his practical suggestions, looked forward to its



manifesting, when it was published, an equity and reasonableness



which would put to shame the barbarous jurisprudence of England.



Much of it -- I am afraid I must say, most of it -- is worthless



save for historical purposes, but on some points it really does



come close to the most advanced legal doctrines of our day. The



explanation -- which I will hereafter give at length -- I believe



to lie in the method of its development, which has not been



through the decision of courts, but by the opinions of lawyers on



hypothetical states of fact.



    I think I may lay down that, wherever we have any knowledge



of a body of Aryan custom, either anterior to or but slightly



affected by the Roman Empire, it will be found to exhibit some



strong points of resemblance to the institutions which are the



basis of the Brehon law. The depth to which the empire has



stamped itself on the political arrangements of the modern world



has been illustrated of late years with much learning; but I



repeat my assertion that the great difference between the Roman



Empire and all other sovereignties of the ancient world lay in



the activity of its legislation, through the Edicts of the



Praetor and the Constitution of the Emperors. For many races, it



actually repealed their customs and replaced them by new ones.



For others, the results of its legislation mixed themselves



indistinguishably with their law. With others, it introduced or



immensely stimulated the habit of legislation; and this is one of



the ways in which it has influenced the stubborn body of Germanic



custom prevailing in Great Britain. But wherever the institutions



of any Aryan race have been untouched by it, or slightly touched



by it, the common basis of Aryan usage is perfectly discernible;



and thus it is that these Brehon law-tracts enable us to connect



the races at the eastern and western extremities of a later Aryan



world, the Hindoos and the Irish.



    The Lectures which follow will help, I trust, to show what



use the student of comparative jurisprudence may make of this



novel addition to our knowledge of ancient law. Meantime, there



is some interest in contrasting the view of its nature, origin,



and growth, which we are obliged to take here, with that to which



the ancient Irish practitioners occasionally strove hard to give



currency. The Senchus Mor, the Great Book of the Ancient Law, was



doubtless a most precious possession of the law-school or family



to which it belonged; and its owners have joined it to a preface



in which a semi-divine authorship is boldly claimed for it.



Odhran, the charioteer of St Patrick -- so says this preface --



had been killed, and the question arose whether Nuada, the



slayer, should die, or whether the saint was bound by his own



principles to unconditional forgiveness. St Patrick did not



decide the point himself; the narrator, in true professional



spirit, tells us that he set the precedent according to which a



stranger from beyond the sea always selects a legal adviser. He



chose 'to go according to the judgment of the royal poet of the



men of Erin, Dubhthach Mac ua Lugair,' and he 'blessed the mouth'



of Dubhthach. A poem, doubtless of much antiquity and celebrity,



is then put into the mouth of the arbitrator, and by the judgment



embodied in it Nuada is to die; but he ascends straight to heaven



through the intercession of St Patrick. "Then King Laeghaire



said, "It is necessary for you, O men of Erin, that every other



law should be settled and arranged by us as well as this." "It is



better to do so," said Patrick. It was then that all the



professors of the sciences in Erin were assembled,and each of



them exhibited his art before Patrick, in the presence of every



chief in Erin. It was then Dubhthach was ordered to exhibit all



the judgments and all the poetry of Erin, and every law which



prevailed among the men of Erin... This is the Cain Patraic, and



no human Brehon of the Gaedhil is able to abrogate anything that



is found in the Senchus Mor.'



    The inspired award of Dubhthach that Nuada must die suggests



to the commentator the following remark: "What is understood from



the above decision which God revealed to Dubhthach is, that it



was a middle course between forgiveness and retaliation; for



retaliation prevailed in Erin before Patrick, and Patrick brought



forgiveness with him; that is, Nuada was put to death for his



crime, and Patrick obtained heaven for him. At this day we keep



between forgiveness and retaliation; for as at present no one has



the power of bestowing heaven, as Patrick had at that day, so no



one is put to death for his intentional crimes, so long as 'eric'



fine is obtained; and whenever 'eric' fine is not obtained, he is



put to death for his intentional crime, and placed on the sea for



his unintentional crimes." It is impossible, of course, to accept



the statement that this wide-spread ancient institution, the



pecuniary fine levied on tribes or families for the wrongs done



by their members, had its origin in Christian influences; but



that it succeeded simple retaliation is in the highest degree



probable, and no doubt in its day it was at least as great an



advantage to the communities among whom it prevailed as was that



stern administration of criminal justice to which the Englishmen



of the sixteenth century were accustomed, and on which they so



singularly prided themselves. but by the sixteenth century it may



well have outlived its usefulness, and so may have partially



justified the invectives of its English censors, who generally



have the 'eric'-fine for homicide in view when they denounce the



Brehon law as 'contrary to God's law and man's.'




