


Lecture XII

Sovereignty

    The historical theories commonly received among English
lawyers have done so much harm not only to the study of law but
to the study of history, that an account of the origin and growth
of our legal system, founded on the examination of new materials
and the re-examination of old ones, is perhaps the most urgently
needed of all additions to English knowledge. But next to a new
history of law, what we most require is a new philosophy of law.
If our country ever gives birth to such a philosophy, we shall
probably owe it to two advantages. The first of them is our
possession of a legal system which for many purposes may be
considered indigenous. Our national pride, which has sometimes
retarded or limited our advance in juridical enquiry, has kept
our law singularly pure from mixture with the stream of legal
rules flowing from the great fountain of the Roman Corpus Juris,
and thus, when we place it in juxtaposition with any other
European legal system, the results of the comparison are far more
fruitful of instruction than those obtained by contrasting the
various Continental bodies of law with one another. The second
advantage I believe to consist in the growing familiarity of
Englishmen with the investigations of the so-called Analytical
Jurists, of whom the most considerable are Jeremy Bentham and
John Austin. Of this advantage we have a monopoly. Bentham seems
to be exclusively known in France and Germany as the author of an
unpopular system of morals. Austin is apparently not known at
all. Yet to Bentham, and even in a higher degree to Austin, the
world is indebted for the only existing attempt to construct a
system of jurisprudence by strict scientific process and to found
it, not on * priori assumption, but on the observation,
comparison, and analysis of the various legal conceptions. There
is not the smallest necessity for accepting all the conclusions
of these great writers with implicit deference, but there is the
strongest necessity for knowing what those conclusions are. They
are indispensable, if for no other object, for the purpose of
clearing the head.
    An important distinction between Bentham and Austin is not as
often recognised as it ought to be. Bentham in the main is a
writer on legislation. Austin in the main is a writer on
jurisprudence, Bentham is chiefly concerned with law as it might
be and ought to be. Austin is chiefly concerned with law as it
is. Each trespasses occasionally on the domain of the other.
Unless Bentham had written the treatise called the 'Fragment on
Government,' Austin's 'Province of Jurisprudence Determined,'
which sets forth the basis of his system, would never probably
have been composed. On the other hand, Austin, in his singular
discussion of the theory of utility as an index to the Law of
God, has entered on an investigation of the class followed by
Bentham. Still the description which I have given of their
objects is sufficiently correct as a general description, and
those objects are widely different. Bentham aims at the
improvement of the law to be effected by the application of the
principles now indissolubly associated with his name. Almost all
of his more important suggestions have been adopted by the
English Legislature, but the process of engrafting on the law
what to each successive generation seem to be improvements is in
itself of indefinite duration, and may go on, and possibly will
go on, as long as the human race lasts. Austin's undertaking is
more modest. It would be completed, if a Code were produced
perfectly logical in order of arrangement and perfectly lucid in
statement of rule Jurisprudence, the science of positive law, is
sometimes spoken of nowadays as if it would bring the substance
of the law into a state of indefinite perfection. It would
doubtless, if it were carried far, lead indirectly to great legal
reforms by dispelling obscurities and dissipating delusions, but
the investigation of the principles on which the direct
improvement of substantive legal rules should be conducted
belongs nevertheless not to the theorist on jurisprudence but to
the theorist on legislation.
    The portion of Austin's Lectures which sets forth the basis
of his system, and which was published several years ago as the
'Province of Jurisprudence Determined,' has long been one of the
higher classbooks in this University; and, taken together with
the other lectures more recently given to the world (though
unhappily in a fragmentary shape), it must always, or for a long
time to come, be the mainstay of the studies prosecuted in this
Department. Making the utmost acknowledgment of the value of the
book, I find it impossible not to recognise the magnitude of the
difficulties which it occasions to the beginner. Those which have
their origin in peculiarities of style and which seem to be
attributable to the perpetual commerce of thought in which the
writer lived with his precursors, Bentham and Hobbes, I find to
be practically less grave than difficulties of another sort which
arise from the repulsion created in the mind by the shape in
which the conceptions of law, right, and duty are presented to it
by Austin's analysis. Of course, so far as this distaste is
caused by unpalatable truth, any tenderness shown to it would be
wasted; but even thus it is a misfortune, and, if it be in any
degree provoked by avoidable causes, such as methods of statement
or arrangement, no pains bestowed on the attempt to remove it to
this extent would be thrown away. A very frequent effect of
forcing on students of active mind and industrious habits a
system or subject which for some reason or other is repugnant to
them is to make them regard it as so much dogma, as something
resting on the personal authority of the writer with whose name
it happens to be associated. Now nothing could be more
unfortunate for the philosophy of law than that the system of the
'Province of Jurisprudence Determined' should come to be regarded
simply as Austin's system -- as standing by the side. of
Blackstone's or Hegel's or any other system -- as interchangeable
with it or equivalent to it. For, when certain assumptions or
postulates have been made, I am fully convinced that the great
majority of Austin's positions follow as of course and by
ordinary logical process. These assumptions do not appear to me
to be stated and described by Austin with sufficient fulness --
possibly because, though he is a comparatively modern writer, a
part of the enquiries necessary for such statement had in his day
been barely commenced -- but, whatever the cause, the result is
that he seems to me open to the same charge as some of the
greatest writers on Political Economy who have omitted to set
forth at the outset with adequate distinctness the limited
objects of their science, and who have thus attracted to it a
mass of prejudice of which it may never possibly get rid. The
present Lecture is an attempt to show what a certain number of
these assumptions or postulates are; in that which follows it, I
endeavour to show how these assumptions are affected by some
conclusions which we have arrived at in former Lectures during
our investigation of the early history of society. (Supra,
Lectures I to XI) I think it best for my purpose to begin with
calling attention to the definition of Sovereignty. Beyond all
doubt this is the logical order of the discussion undertaken by
Austin, and I find it difficult to understand, except on one
hypothesis, why, deserting the arrangement of Hobbes, he began
the discussion of this part of his subject by the analysis of
Law, Right and Duty, and ended it with an account of Sovereignty
which it seems to me should have come first. I imagine, however,
that Blackstone influenced him, as he did Bentham, so to speak,
by repulsion. Blackstone, following Roman Institutional writers,
begins with a definition of law and proceeds to give a theory of
the connection of the various legal conceptions. The desire to
expose the fallacies of this portion of the Commentaries
furnished Bentham with his principal motive for writing the
Fragment on Government, and Austin with his chief inducement to
determine the Province of Jurisprudence, and the latter seems to
me to have thought that the propositions he disputed would be
most effectually disposed of, if they were contradicted in the
order given them by their author. However that may be, the branch
of my subject on which I shall first have to enter may be
described as an enquiry into the probable mode in which Austin's
analysis would have been affected, if he had begun in his first
Lecture with the examination of the nature of Sovereignty. This
examination he placed in the Sixth, which, so far as the
'Province of Jurisprudence' is concerned, is the last of his
Lectures.
    I believe I may assume that most of my hearers are familiar
with the general character of the investigation prosecuted by
Austin in the Treatise to which I have referred, but, as his
definitions are not easily carried in the memory in their
complete shape, I will give his descriptions of an Independent
Political Society and of Sovereignty, the two conceptions being
interdependent and inseparable from one another.
    'If (he says) a determinate human superior, not in the habit
of obedience to a like superior, receive habitual obedience from
the bulk of a given society, that determinate superior is
Sovereign in that society, and the society, including the
superior, is a society political and independent.' 
    He then proceeds: 'To that determinate superior the other
members of the society are subject; or on that determinate
superior the other members of the society are dependent. The
position of its other members towards that determinate superior
is a state of subjection or a state of dependence. The mutual
relation which subsists between that superior and them, may be
styled the relation of Sovereign and Subject, or the relation of
Sovereignty and Subjection.'
    I may perhaps save the necessity for part of the
amplification and explanation of these definitions contained in
the Chapter in which they occur, if I state Austin's doctrine of
Sovereignty in another way -- more popularly, though without, I
think, any substantial inaccuracy. It is as follows: There is, in
every independent political community -- that is, in every
political community not in the habit of obedience to a superior
above itself -- some single person or some combination of persons
which has the power of compelling the other members of the
community to do exactly as it pleases. This single person or
group -- this individual or this collegiate Sovereign (to employ
Austin's phrase) -- may be found in every independent political
community as certainly as the centre of gravity in a mass of
matter. If the community be violently or voluntarily divided into
a number of separate fragments, then, as soon as each fragment
has settled down (perhaps after an interval of anarchy) into a
state of equilibrium, the Sovereign will exist and with proper
care will be discoverable in each of the now independent
portions. The Sovereignty over the North American Colonies of
Great Britain had its seat in one place before they became the
United States, in another place afterwards; but in both cases
there was a discoverable Sovereign somewhere. This Sovereign,
this person or combination of persons, universally occurring in
all independent political communities, has in all such
communities one characteristic, common to all the shapes
Sovereignty may take, the possession of irresistible force, not
necessarily exerted but capable of being exerted. According to
the terminology preferred by Austin, the Sovereign, if a single
person, is or should be called a Monarch; if a small group, the
name is an Oligarchy; if a group of considerable dimensions, an
Aristocracy. if very large and numerous, a Democracy. Limited
Monarchy, a phrase perhaps more fashionable in Austin's day than
it is now, is abhorred by Austin, and the Government of Great
Britain he classes with Aristocracies. That which all the forms
of Sovereignty have in common is the power (the power but not
necessarily the will) to put compulsion without limit on subjects
or fellow-subjects. It is sometimes extremely difficult to
discover the Sovereign in a given State, and, when he or it is
discovered, he may fall under no recognised designation, but,
where there is an independent political society not in a
condition of anarchy, the Sovereign is certainly there. The
question of determining his character is, you will understand,
always a question of fact. It is never a question of law or
morals. He who, when a particular person or group is asserted to
constitute the Sovereign in a given community, denies the
proposition on the ground that such Sovereignty is an usurpation
or a violation of constitutional principle, has completely missed
Austin's point of view.
    The definitions which I read from the Sixth Lecture furnish
Austin's tests for discovering the seat of Sovereignty in
independent states. I will again refer to a few of the most
important of them, though very briefly.
    First, the Sovereign is a determinate human superior. He is
not necessarily a single person; in the modern Western world he
is very rarely so; but he must have so much of the attributes of
a single person as to be determinate. If he is not a single
person, he must be a number of persons capable of acting in a
corporate or collegiate capacity. This part of the definition is
absolutely necessary, since the Sovereign must effect his
exertions of power, must issue his orders, by a definite exercise
of his will. The possession of physical power, which is one
characteristic of Sovereignty, has as matter of historical fact
repeatedly been for a time in the hands of a number of persons
not determinate, not so connected together as to be capable of
exercising volition, but such a state of things Austin would call
anarchy, though it might not have all the usually recognised
symptoms of a revolutionary interval. At the same time, the
limitation of Sovereignty to determinate groups, when the
Sovereign is not an individual, is extremely important, since it
qualities the notion of Sovereignty by rendering it subject to
the various artifices by which an exercise of volition is
elicited from a corporate body. Familiar to us as is the practice
of taking the opinion of a majority as the opinion of an entire
group, and natural as it seems, nothing can be more artificial.
    Again, the bulk of the society must obey the superior who is
to be called Sovereign. Not the whole of the society, for in that
case Sovereignty would be impossible, but the bulk, the large
majority, must obey. After the accession of the House of Hanover
to the British throne, a certain number of Jacobites and a
considerable portion of the Scottish Highlanders habitually
disobeyed or disregarded the commands of the British Crown and
Parliament, but the bulk of the nation, including no doubt the
bulk of the Jacobites themselves, gave to these commands a
practical obedience. On Austin's principles, therefore, there is
not the least ground for questioning the Sovereignty of George
the First and Second and of the Parliaments elected at their
summons. The Jacobite view, that the Hanoverian Kings were
exclusively Sovereign in Hanover, would at once be throw aside by
Austin as not raising that question of fact which is alone
disputable under his system.
    Next, the Sovereign must receive an habitual obedience from
the bulk of the community. In European societies professing the
Roman Catholic faith, the great majority of the population
receives a variety of directions on points of personal conduct,
either mediately or immediately, from the See of Rome. But,
compared with the number of times it submits itself to the laws
of the country it inhabits, its obedience to these extrinsic
commands is only occasional, and not habitual. At the same time a
dim appreciation of the principles brought into light by Austin
may be detected in several famous ecclesiastical controversies,
which sometimes tend to become disputes whether the obedience to
the See of Rome which is actually paid is or is not so frequent
as to fall under the description of habitual.
    A further characteristic of Sovereignty is immunity from the
control of every other human superior. The limitation is
obviously necessary, for otherwise the Governor-General of India
in Council would be Sovereign, and indeed would exhibit a closer
correspondence with the more salient features of Sovereignty than
almost any other potentate on the face of the globe.
    Those who have observed with what slowness definite
conceptions are developed in the field of history and politics
will be prepared to hear that this whole view of the nature of
Sovereignty is older than Austin's work. But, so far as my own
knowledge extends, I do not think that any material portion of it
is older than Hobbes. On the other hand, in the Leviathan of
Hobbes and in the Chapter De Cive in his Treatise first published
in Latin, called the Elementa Philosophiae, the analysis of
Government and Society and the determination of Sovereignty are
so nearly completed that little could be added to them by Bentham
and Austin. The originality of these later writers, and more
particularly of Austin, resides in their much fuller examination
of the conceptions dependent on the notion of Sovereignty --
positive law, positive duty, sanction and right -- in setting
forth the relations of these conceptions to others superficially
resembling them, in combating objections to the theory by which
the entire group of notions are connected together, and in
applying this theory to certain complex states of fact which had
arisen since Hobbes wrote. There is, however, one great
difference between Hobbes and his latest successor. The process
of Hobbes was scientific, but his object was less scientific than
political. When, with a keenness of intuition and lucidity of
statement which have never been rivalled, he has made out a case
for the universal theoretical existence of Sovereignty, it
becomes clear that he has, to say the least, a strong preference
for monarchies over aristocracies and democracies, or (to use the
phraseology of the school which he founded) for individual over
corporate Sovereignty. Those of his intellectual followers who
would have repudiated his politics have often asserted that he
has been misunderstood, and no doubt some superficial readers
have supposed that he was pointing at despotism when he was
really referring to the essentially unqualified power of the
Sovereign whatever the form of the Sovereignty. But I do not
think it can in candour be denied that his strong dislike of the
Long Parliament and of the English Common law, as the great
instrument of resistance to the Stuart Kings, has occasionally
coloured the language which he uses in examining the nature of
Sovereignty, Law, and Anarchy; nor is it matter for surprise that
he should have been charged during his life with having devised
his system with the secret intention of making his peace with the
Protector, though the accusation itself is sufficiently refuted
by dates. But Austin's object is strictly scientific. If he has
fallen into errors, he has been led into them by his philosophy,
and his language scarcely ever betrays the colour of his
political opinions.
    Another considerable difference is this. Hobbes, it is well
known, speculated on the origin of Government and Sovereignty. It
is the one fact which some persons seem to have learned about
him, and they appear to think his philosophy sufficiently
condemned by it. But Austin barely enters on this enquiry,. and
indeed he occasionally, though perhaps inadvertently, uses
language which almost seems to imply that Sovereignty and the
conceptions dependent on it have an * priori existence. Now in
this matter I myself hold that the method of Hobbes was correct.
It is true that nothing can be more worthless in itself than
Hobbes's conjectural account of the origin of society and
government. Mankind, he asserts, were originally in a state of
war. They then made a compact under which every man abandoned his
powers of aggression, and the result was Sovereignty, and through
Sovereignty law, peace, and order. The theory is open to every
sort of objection. There is no evidence of any stage of the
supposed history, and the little we know of primitive man
contradicts it. The universal disorder of the race in its infancy
may be true of the contests of tribe with tribe and of family
with family; but it is not true of the relations of individual
man with individual man, whom we, on the contrary, first discern
living together under a regimen which, if we are compelled to
employ modern phraseology, we must call one of ultra-legality.
And, in addition, the theory is open to precisely the same
objection as the counter-hypothesis of Locke, that it antedates
the modern juridical conception of Contract. But still I think
that Hobbes did correctly in addressing himself to the problem,
though he did little to solve it. The duty of enquiring, if not
how Sovereignty arose, at all events through what stages it has
passed, is in my judgment indispensable. It is only thus that we
can assure ourselves in what degree the results of the Austinian
analysis tally with facts.
    There is, in truth, nothing more important to the student of
jurisprudence than that he should carefully consider how far the
observed facts of human nature and society bear out the
assertions which are made or seem to be made about Sovereignty by
the Analytical Jurists. To begin with, these assertions must be
disentangled from one another. The first of them is that, in
every independent community of men, there resides the power of
acting with irresistible force on the several members of that
community. This may be accepted as actual fact. If all the
members of the community had equal physical strength and were
unarmed, the power would be a mere result from the superiority of
numbers; but, as a matter. of fact, various causes, of which much
the most important have been the superior physical strength and
the superior armament of portions of the community have conferred
on numerical minorities the power of applying irresistible
pressure to the individuals who make up the community as a whole.
The next assertion is that, in every independent political
community, that is in every independent community neither in a
state of nature on the one hand nor in a state of anarchy on the
other, the power of using or directing the irresistible force
stored-up in the society resides in some person or combination of
persons who belong to the society themselves. The truth of this
assertion is strongly suggested by a certain class of facts,
particularly by the political facts of the Western and Modern
world; but all the relevant facts, it must be recollected, have
not been fully observed. The whole world, of which theorists on
human nature are extremely apt to forget considerably more than
half, and the entire history of the whole world, would have to be
examined before we could be quite sure of the facts, and, if this
were done, it may be that a great n umber of the facts would not
so strongly suggest the conclusion, or, as I myself think, the
assertion which we are considering would not so much be shown to
be false as to be only verbally true, and therefore without the
value which it possesses in societies of the type to which our
own belongs. An assertion, however, which the great Analytical
Jurists cannot be charged with making, but which some of their
disciples go very near to hazarding, that the Sovereign person or
group actually wields the stored-up force of society by an
uncontrolled exercise of will, is certainly never in accordance
with fact. A despot with a disturbed brain is the sole
conceivable example of such Sovereignty. The vast mass of
influences, which we may call for shortness moral, perpetually
shapes, limits, or forbids the actual direction of the forces of
society by its Sovereign. This is the point which, of all others,
it is practically most necessary that the student should bear in
mind, because it does most to show what the Austinian view of
Sovereignty really is -- that it is the result of Abstraction. It
is arrived at by throwing aside all the characteristics and
attributes of Government and Society except one, and by
connecting all forms of political superiority together through
their common possession of force. The elements neglected in the
process are always important, sometimes of extreme importance,
for they consist of all the influences controlling human action
except force directly applied or directly apprehended ; but the
operation of throwing them aside for purposes of classification
is, I need hardly say, perfectly legitimate philosophically, and
is only the application of a method in ordinary scientific use.
    To put the same thing in another way, that which we reject in
the process of abstraction by which the conception of Sovereignty
is reached is the entire history of each community. First of all,
it is the history, the whole historical antecedents, of each
society by which it has been determined where, in what person or
group, the power of using the social force is to reside. The
theory of Sovereignty neglects the mode in which the result has
been arrived at, and thus is enabled to class together the
coercive authority of the great King of Persia, of the Athenian
Demos, of the later Roman Emperors, of the Russian Czar, and of
the Crown and Parliament of Great Britain. Next, it is its
history, the entire mass of its historical antecedents, which in
each community determines how the Sovereign shall exercise or
forbear from exercising his irresistible coercive power. All that
constitutes this -- the whole enormous aggregate of opinions,
sentiments, beliefs, superstitions, and prejudices, of ideas of
all kinds, hereditary and acquired, some produced by institutions
and some by the constitution of human nature -- is rejected by
the Analytical Jurists. And thus it is that, so far as the
restrictions confined in their definition of Sovereignty are
concerned, the Queen and Parliament of our own country might
direct all weakly children to be put to death or establish a
system of lettres de cachet.
    The procedure of the Analytical Jurists is closely analogous
to that followed in mathematics and political economy. It is
strictly philosophical, but the practical value of all sciences
founded on abstractions depends on the relative importance of the
elements rejected and the elements retained in the process of
abstraction. Tried by this test, mathematical science is of
greatly more value than political economy, and both of them than
jurisprudence as conceived by the writers I am criticising.
Similarly, the misconceptions to which the Austinian analysis
gives rise are very similar to those which might be conceived as
embarrassing the student of mixed mathematics, and which do
actually embarrass the student of political economy. Just as it
is possible to forget the existence of friction in nature and the
reality of other motives in society except the desire to grow
rich, so the pupil of Austin may be tempted to forget that there
is more in actual Sovereignty than force, and more in laws which
are the commands of sovereigns than can be got out of them by
merely considering them as regulated force. I am not prepared to
deny that Austin occasionally, and Hobbes frequently, express
themselves as if their system were not limited throughout by the
limitation which is at its base All the great masters of
Abstraction are, in fact, now and then betrayed into speaking or
writing as if the materials thrown aside in the purely mental
process were actually dross.
    When, however, it has once been seen that in Austin's system
the determination of Sovereignty ought to precede the
determination of Law, when it is once understood that the
Austinian conception of Sovereignty has been reached through
mentally uniting all forms of government in a group by conceiving
them as stripped of every attribute except coercive force, and
when it is steadily borne in mind that the deductions from an
abstract principle are never from the nature of the case
completely exemplified in facts, not only, as it seems to me, do
the chief difficulties felt by the student of Austin disappear,
but some of the assertions made by him at which the beginner is
most apt to stumble have rather the air of self-evident
propositions. I dare say you are sufficiently acquainted with his
treatise to make it enough for me to mention some of these
propositions, without the amplifications which are necessary for
their perfectly accurate statement. Jurisprudence is the science
of Positive Law. Positive Laws are Commands, addressed by
Sovereigns to their Subjects, imposing a Duty, or condition of
obligedness, or obligation, on those Subjects, and threatening a
Sanction, or Penalty, in the event of disobedience to the
Command. A Right is the faculty or power conferred by the
Sovereign on certain members of the community to draw down the
sanction on a fellow-subject violating a Duty. Now all these
conceptions of Law, Right, Duty and Punishment depend upon the
primary conception of Sovereignty, just as the lower links of a
chain hanging down depend upon the highest link. But Sovereignty,
for the purposes of Austin's system, has no attribute but force,
and consequently the view here taken of 'law' 'obligation' and
'right' is a view of them regarded exclusively as products of
coercive force. The 'sanction' thus becomes the primary and most
important member of the series of notions and gives its colour to
all the others. Probably nobody ever found a difficulty in
allowing that laws have the character given to them by Austin, so
far as such laws have proceeded from formal Legislatures. But
many persons, and among them some men of powerful mind, have
struggled against the position that the great mass of legal rules
which have never been prescribed by the organ of State,
conventionally known as the Legislature, are commands of the
Sovereign. The customary law of all countries which have not
included their law in Codes, and specially the English Common
law, have often had an origin claimed for them independently of
the Sovereign, and theories have been propounded on the subject
which Austin scouts as mysterious and unintelligible. The way in
which Hobbes and he bring such bodies of rules as the Common law
under their system is by insisting on a maxim which is of vital
importance to it -- 'Whatever the Sovereign permits, he
commands.' Until customs are enforced by Courts of Justice, they
are merely 'positive morality,' rules enforced by opinion, but,
as soon as Courts of Justice enforce them, they become commands
of the Sovereign, conveyed through the Judges who are his
delegates or deputies. It is a better answer to this theory than
Austin would perhaps have admitted that it is founded on a mere
artifice of speech, and that it assumes Courts of Justice to act
in a way and from motives of which they are quite unconscious.
But, when it is clearly comprehended that, in this system, there
are no associations with the Sovereign but force or power, the
position that what Sovereigns permit they command becomes more
easily intelligible. They command because, being by the
assumption possessed of uncontrollable force, they could innovate
without limit at any moment. The Common law consists of their
commands because they can repeal or alter or re-state it at
pleasure. The theory is perfectly defensible as a theory, but its
practical value and the degree in which it approximates to truth
differ greatly in different ages and countries. There have been
independent political communities, and indeed there would still
prove to be some of them if the world were thoroughly searched,
in which the Sovereign, though possessed of irresistible power,
never dreams of innovation, and believes the persons or groups,
by whom laws are declared and applied, to be as much part of the
necessary constitution of society as he is himself. There have
again been independent political societies in which the Sovereign
has enjoyed irresistible coercive power and has carried
innovation to the farthest point; but in which every single
association connected with law would have violence done to it if
laws were regarded as his commands. The Tyrant of a Greek city
often satisfied every one of Austin's tests of Sovereignty; yet
it was part of the accepted definition of a Tyrant that 'he
subverted the laws.' Let it be understood that it is quite
possible to make the theory fit in with such cases, but the
process is a mere straining of language. It is carried on by
taking words and propositions altogether out of the sphere of the
ideas habitually associated with them.
    Before proceeding to speak at some length in my next Lecture
of these historical limitations on the practical value of
Austin's theories, let me repeat my opinion that if the method of
discussion which seems to me correct had been followed in his
treatise, and if the examination of Sovereignty had preceded the
examination of the conceptions dependent on it, a considerable
number of the statements which he has made respecting these
latter conceptions would have appeared not merely innocent but
self-evident. Law is here regarded as regulated force, simply
because force is the one element which has been allowed to enter
into the primary notion upon which all the others depend. The one
doctrine of this school of jurists which is repugnant to lawyers
would lose its air of paradox if an assumption were made which,
in itself theoretically unobjectionable, manifestly approximates
to practical truth as the course of history proceeds -- the
assumption that what the Sovereign might alter, but does not
alter, he commands. The same arrangement would have a further
advantage, as it seems to me, through the modifications it would
necessitate in Austin's manner of discussing Morality, though the
subject is not one which can be here treated with completeness.
The position at which many readers have stumbled -- I do not
affect to do more than state it in popular language -- is that
the sanction of moral rules, as such, is the disapprobation which
one's fellow-men manifest at their violation. It is sometimes
construed to mean that the only motive for obeying moral rules is
the fear of such disapprobation. Such a construction of Austin's
language is an entire misconception of his meaning; but, if the
order of discussion which I advocate had been followed, I do not
think it could ever possibly occur to any mind. Let us suppose
Austin to have completed his analysis of Sovereignty and of the
conceptions immediately dependent on it, law, legal right, and
legal obligation. He would then have to examine that great mass
of rules, which men in fact obey, which have some of the
characteristics of laws, but which are not (as such) imposed by
Sovereigns on subjects, and which are not (as such) enforced by
the sanction supplied by Sovereign power. It would be, of course,
incumbent on the philosophical jurist to examine these rules,
because Sovereigns being by his hypothesis human superiors are,
as human beings, subject to them. Austin has, in fact, examined
them from this point of view in some of his most interesting
passages. While insisting that Sovereignty is from the nature of
the case incapable of legal limitation, he fully admits that
Sovereigns are restrained from issuing some commands and
determined to issue others by rules which, though they are not
laws, are of extreme cogency. The Crown and Parliament of Great
Britain are in his view Sovereign -- a sovereign aristocracy, as
he would call it -- but, though this aristocracy could for
purposes of argument do anything it pleased, it would be out
raging all experience to assert that it does this. That great
body of rules which is embodied in constitutional maxims keeps it
from doing some things; that great body of rules which in
ordinary usage are called moral keeps it from doing others. What
common characteristics has this aggregate of rules which operate
on men and on Sovereigns, like other men? Austin, as you know,
names it 'positive morality', and says that its sanction is
opinion, or the disapproval of the bulk of the community
following on its violation. Properly understood, this last is an
obviously true proposition, for what is meant is that public
disapprobation is the one sanction which all these rules have in
common. The rule which keeps the Crown and Parliament from
declaring murder legal, and the rule which keeps them from
allowing the Queen to govern without Ministers, are connected
together through the penalty attendant on a breach of them, which
is the strong disapprobation of a majority of Englishmen; and it
is their having a sanction of some kind which principally
connects both rules with laws proper. But, though fear of opinion
be a motive for obedience to both rules, it does not at all
follow that the sole motive for obedience to both rules is fear
of opinion. This fear would be allowed by most people to be the
chief, if not the exclusive, motive for obedience to
constitutional rules; but such an admission involves no necessary
assertion whatever as to the complete sanction of moral rules.
The truth is that Austin's system is consistent with any ethical
theory; and, if Austin seems to assert the contrary, I think the
cause is to be sought in his firm conviction of the truth of his
own ethical creed, which, I need not say, was Utilitarianism in
its earlier shape I do not, indeed, for a moment intend to deny
that the careful study of Austin would probably modify the
student's view of morals. The discussion of ethics, like many
others, is conducted amid much obscurity of thought, and there is
no specific more sovereign for dispelling such obscurity than the
association of the cardinal terms which enter into our enquiry
with absolutely consistent meanings, and the employment of the
terms with these meanings as a test for the detection of
equivocal phraseology. It is the one inestimable service of the
Analytical School to jurisprudence and morals that it furnishes
them with a rigidly consistent terminology. But there is not the
faintest reason for thinking that the intelligent and
appreciative student of the system must necessarily be an
utilitarian.
    I shall state hereafter what I believe to be the true point
of contact between Austin's system and the utilitarian
philosophy. Meantime, devotion to this philosophy, coupled with
what I hold to be a faulty arrangement, has produced the most
serious blemish in the 'Province of Jurisprudence Determined.'
The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th Lectures are occupied with an attempt to
identify the law of God and the law of Nature (so far as these
last words can be allowed to have any meaning) with the rules
required by the theory of utility. The lectures contain many
just, interesting, and valuable observations; but the
identification, which is their object, is quite gratuitous and
valueless for any purpose. Written, I doubt not, in the honest
belief that they would help to obviate or remove prejudices, they
have attracted to Austin's system a whole cloud of prejudices
both from the theological and from the philosophical side. If,
however, following the order I have suggested, Austin, after
concluding the examination of the nature of Sovereignty and of
positive law, had entered on an enquiry into the nature of the
laws of God, it must have taken the form of an investigation of
the question how far the characteristics of the human superiors
called Sovereigns can be supposed to attach to an all-powerful
and non-human ruler, and how many of the conceptions dependent on
human Sovereignty must be considered as contained in his
commands. I much doubt whether such an enquiry would have seemed
called for in a treatise like Austin's. Taken at its best, it is
a discussion belonging not to the philosophy of law but to the
philosophy of legislation. The jurist, properly so called, has
nothing to do with any ideal standard of law or morals.


