


Lecture VI







The Chief and the Land







    The Brehon law-tracts strongly suggest that, among the things



which we in modern times have most forgotten, is the importance



of horned cattle, not merely in the infancy of society, but at a



period when it had made some considerable advance towards



maturity It is scarcely possible to turn over a page without



finding some allusion to beeves, to bulls, cows, heifers, and



calves. Horses appear, sheep, swine, and dogs; and bees, the



producers of the greatest of primitive luxuries, have a place



assigned to them as an article of property which has something



corresponding to it in old Roman law. But the animals much the



most frequently mentioned are kine. There are some few facts both



of etymology and of legal classification which point to the



former importance of oxen. Capitale -- kine reckoned by the



head-cattle -- has given birth to one of the most famous terms of



law and to one of the most famous terms of political economy,



Chattels and Capital. Pecunia was probably the word for money



which was employed by the largest part of mankind for the longest



time together. But oxen, though they have furnished a modern



synonym for personal property, were not, I need scarcely say,



classed in the lower order of commodities in all ancient systems



of law. The primitive Roman law placed them in the highest class,



and joined them with land and slaves as items of the Res Mancipi.



As in several other instances, the legal dignity of this



description of property among the Romans appears to answer to its



religious dignity among the Hindoos. Kine, which the most ancient



Sanscrit literature shows to have been eaten as food, became at



some unknown period sacred, and their flesh forbidden;



and.ultimately two of the chief 'Things which required a



Mancipation' at Rome, oxen and landed property, had their



counterpart in the sacred bull of Siva and the sacred land of



India.



    The subject has possibly been obscured by an impression that



horned cattle were only of preeminent importance to mankind in



that pastoral stage of society which has been the theme of so



much not altogether profitable speculation. The actual evidence



seems to show that their greatest value was obtained when groups



of men settled on spaces of land and betook themselves to the



cultivation of food-grains. It is very possible that kine were at



first exclusively valued for their flesh and milk, but it is



clear that in very early times a distinct special importance



belonged to them as the instrument or medium of exchange. In the



Homeric literature, they are certainly a measure of value; there



seems no reason to doubt the traditional story that the earliest



coined money known at Rome was stamped with the figure of an ox;



and at all events the connection between 'pecus' and 'pecunia' is



unmistakeable. Part, but by no means all, the prominence given by



the Brehon lawyers to horned cattle wises certainly from their



usefulness in exchange. Throughout the Brehon tracts fines, dues,



rents, and returns are calculated in live-stock, not exclusively



in kine, but nearly so. Two standards of value are constantly



referred to, 'sed' and 'cumhal.' 'Cumhal' is said to have



originally meant a female slave, just as 'ancilla' in medieval



Latinity sometimes means the price of a slave-girl; but 'sed' is



plainly used for an amount or quantity of live stock, probably to



some small extent variable. The next stage, however, in the



history of cattle is that at which their service to mankind is



greatest. They are now valued chiefly, in some communities



exclusively, for their use in tillage, for their labour and their



manure. Their place has been taken very generally in Western



Europe by horses as beasts of plough, but the change was even



there both gradual and comparatively modern; and there are still



large portions of the world where the horse is exclusively



employed, as it seems everywhere to have been at one time, for



war, for pleasure, or the chase. Oxen were thus almost the sole



representatives of what a Political Economist would now call



Capital applied to land. I think it probable that the economical



causes which led to the disuse of oxen as a medium of exchange



led also to the change in their legal position which we find to



have taken place at Rome and in India. The sanctification of the



ox among the Hindoos, rendering his flesh unlawful as food, must



certainly have been connected with the desire to preserve him for



tillage, and his elevation to a place among the Res Mancipi may



well have been supposed to have the same tendency, since it made



his alienation extremely difficult, and must have greatly



embarrassed his employment in exchange. At this point the history



of horned cattle becomes unhappily mixed up with that of large



portions of mankind. The same causes which we perceive altering



the position of the ox and turning him into an animal partially



adscriptus glebaei undoubtedly produced also a great extension of



slavery. The plentifulness of land, even in what are considered



old countries, down to comparatively recent times, and the



scarcity of capital even in its rudest forms, seem to me to be



placed in the clearest light by Mr Thorold Rogers's deeply



instructive volumes on Agriculture and Prices during the Middle



Ages; and much in history which has been only partially



intelligible is explained by them. The enormous importation of



slaves into the central territories of the Roman Commonwealth,



and the wholesale degradation of the free cultivating communities



of Western Europe into assemblages of villeins, seem to be



expedients of the same nature as restrictions on the alienation



of the ox and on its consumption for food, and to have been alike



suggested by the same imperious necessity of procuring and



preserving instruments for the cultivation of land.



    The importance of horned cattle to men in a particular state



of society must, as it seems to me, be carefully borne in mind if



we are to understand one of the most remarkable parts of the



ancient Irish law which relates to the practice of 'giving



stock.' I stated before that, though I did not draw the same



inferences from the fact, I agreed with the writers who think



that the land-system of ancient Ireland was theoretically based



on the division of the tribe-lands among the free tribesmen. But



I also said that in my opinion the true difficulty of those days



was not to obtain land but to obtain the means of cultivating it.



The want of capital, taken in its original sense, was the



necessity which pressed on the small holder of land and reduced



him occasionally to the sorest straits. On the other hand, the



great owners of cattle were the various Chiefs, whose primitive



superiority to the other tribesmen in this respect was probably



owing to their natural functions as military leaders of the



tribe. The Brehon law suggests to me that the Chiefs too were



pressed by a difficulty of their own, that of finding sufficient



pasturage for their herds. Doubtless their power over the



waste-lands of the particular group over which they happened to



preside was always growing, but the most fruitful portions of the



tribal territory would probably be those which the free tribesmen



occupied. The fact that the wealth of the Chiefs in cattle was



out of proportion to their power of dealing with the tribal



lands, and the fact that the tribesmen were every now and then



severely pressed by the necessity of procuring the means of



tillage, appear to me to supply the best explanation of the



system of giving and receiving stock, to which two sub-tracts of



the Senchus Mor are devoted, the Cain-Saerrath and the



Cain-Aigillne, the Law of Saer-stock tenure and the Law of



Daer-stock tenure.



    The interest of these two compendia is very great. In the



first place, they go far to show us how it was that the power of



the tribal Chief increased, not merely over his servile



dependants, but over the free tribesmen among whom he had been at



first only primus inter pares. In the next, they give us, from



the authentic records of the ancient usages of one particular



society, a perfectly novel example of a proceeding by which



feudal vassalage was created. I need scarcely dwell on the



historical importance of the various agencies by which the



relation of Lord and Vassal was first established. It was by them



that the Western europe of the Roman despotism was changed into



the Western Europe of the feudal sovereignties. Nothing can be



more strikingly unlike in external aspect than the states of



society which are discerned on either side of the stormy interval



filled with the movement and subsidence of the barbarian



invasions. Just before it is reached, we see a large part of



mankind arranged, so to speak, on one vast level surface



dominated in every part by the overshadowing authority of the



Roman Emperor. On this they lie as so many equal units, connected



together by no institutions which are not assumed to be the



creation of positive Roman law; and between them and their



sovereign there is nothing but a host of functionaries who are



his servants. When feudal Europe has been constituted, all this



is changed. Everybody has become the subordinate of somebody else



higher than himself and yet exalted above him by no great



distance. If I may again employ an image used by me before,



society has taken the form of a pyramid or cone. The great



multitude of cultivators is at its base; and then it mounts up



through ever-narrowing sections till it approaches an apex, not



always visible, but always supposed to be discoverable, in the



Emperor, or the Pope, or God Almighty. There is strong reason to



believe that neither picture contains all the actual detail, and



that neither the theory of the Roman lawyers on one side nor the



theory of the feudal lawyers on the other accounts for or takes



notice of a number of customs and institutions which had a



practical existence in their day. Either theory was, however,



founded upon the most striking facts of the epoch at which it was



framed.



    We know something, though not very much, of the formal



instrumentalities by which the later set of facts became so



extremely dissimilar to the earlier. Mr Stubbs ('Constitutional



History,' i. 252) has thus summarised the most modern views on



the subject. Feudalism 'had grown up from two great sources, the



Benefice and the practice of Commendation. The beneficiary system



originated partly in gifts of land made by the kings out of their



own estates to their kinsmen and servants, with a special



undertaking to be faithful, partly in the surrender by landowners



of their estates to churches or powerful men, to be received back



again and held by them as tenants for rent or service. By the



latter arrangement the weaker man obtained the protection of the



stronger, and he who felt himself insecure placed his title under



the defence of the Church. By the practice of Commendation, on



the other hand, the inferior put himself under the personal care



of a lord, but without altering his title or divesting himself of



his right to his estate; he became a vassal and did homage.'



Commendation, in particular, went on all over Western Europe with



singular universality of operation and singular uniformity of



result, and it helped to transform the ancient structure of



Teutonic society no less than the institutions of the Roman



Provincials. Yet there is considerable mystery about men's



motives for reporting to so onerous a proceeding, and the



statements of nearly all writers on the subject are general and



chiefly conjectural. Perhaps the most precise assertion which we



have been hitherto able to hazard as to the reasons of so large a



part of the world for voluntarily placing themselves in a



conditIon of personal subordination is, that they must have been



connected with the system of civil and criminal responsibility



which prevailed in those times. Families -- real or



artificial-natural or formed by agreement -- were responsible for



the offences and even for the civil liabilities of their members;



but corporate responsibility must have been replaced,



conveniently for all persons concerned, by the responsibility of



a single lord, who could prevent injury and pay compensation for



it, and whose testimony, in compurgation and other legal



proceedings, had a weight often assigned to it exceeding that of



several inferior persons combined. More generally, but with at



least equal plausibility, we can lay down that the general



disorder of the world had much to do with the growth of the new



institutions; and that a little society compactly united under a



feudal lord was greatly stronger for defence or attack than any



body of kinsmen or co-villagers and than any assemblage of



voluntary confederates. It would be absurd, however, to suppose



that we have materials for a confident opinion as to men's



motives for submitting themselves to a change which was probably



recommended to them or forced on them by very various



circumstances in different countries and in relatively different



stages of society.



    I do not wish to generalise unduly from the new information



furnished by the Brehon law, but there has long been a suspicion



(I cannot call it more) among learned men that Celtic usages



would throw some light on Commendation, and, at any rate, amid



the dearth of our materials, any addition to them from an



authentic source is of value. Let me again state the impression I



have formed of the ancient Irish land-system, in the stage at



which it is revealed to us by the Brehon tracts. The land of the



tribe, whether cultivated or waste, belongs to the tribe, and



this is true, whether the tribe be a joint-family of kinsmen or a



larger and more artificial assemblage. Such theoretically is the



principle, if the traditional view of the primitive state of



things may be called a theory. But much of the territory of the



larger tribes hag been permanently assigned to Chiefly families



or to smaller sub-divisions of tribesmen, and the land of the



smaller sub-divisions tends ever to become divided among their



members, subject to certain reserved rights of the collective



brotherhood. Every considerable tribe, and almost every smaller



body of men contained in it, is under a Chief, whether he be one



of the many tribal rulers whom the Irish records call Kings, or



whether he be one of those heads of joint-families whom the



Anglo-Irish lawyers at a later date called the Capita



Cognationum. But he is not owner of the tribal laid. his own land



he may have, consisting of private estate or of official domain,



or of both, and over the general tribal land he has a general



administrative authority, which is ever growing greater over that



portion of it which is unappropriated waste. He is meanwhile the



military leader of his tribesmen, and, probably in that capacity,



he has acquired great wealth in cattle. It has somehow become of



great importance to him to place out portions of his herds among



the tribesmen, and they on their part occasionally find



themselves through stress of circumstance in pressing need of



cattle for employment in tillage. Thus the Chiefs appear in the



Brehon law as perpetually 'giving stock,' and the tribesmen as



receiving it. The remarkable thing is, that out of this practice



grew, not only the familiar incidents of ownership, such as the



right to rent and the liability to pay it, together with some



other incidents less pleasantly familiar to the student of Irish



history, but, above and besides these, newly all the well-known



incidents of feudal tenure. It is by taking stock that the free



Irish tribesman becomes the Ceile or Kyle, the vassal or man of



his Chief, owing him not only rent but service and homage. The



exact effects of 'commendation' are thus produced, and the



interesting circumstance is that they are produced from a simple



and intelligible motive. The transaction between Chief and Vassal



is very burdensome to the latter, but the necessity which leads



to it is pressing, and the force of this necessity would be



greater the more primitive the society in which it arose, and the



more recent its settlement on its lands. All this is especially



instructive, because there is no reason whatever to suppose that



Beneficiary grants and Commendation arose suddenly in the world



at the disruption of the Roman Empire. They were probably, in



some form or other, deeply seated among the rudimentary usages of



all Aryan societies.



    The new position which the tribesman assumed through



accepting stock from a Chief varied according to the quantity of



stock he received. If he took much stock he sank to a much lower



status than if he had taken little. On this difference in the



quantity accepted there turns the difference between the two



great classes of Irish tenantry, the Saer and Daer tenants,



between whose status and that of the free and higher base tenants



of an English manor there is a resemblance not to be mistaken.



The Saer-stock tenant, distinguished by the limited amount of



stock which he received from the Chief, remained a freeman and



retained his tribal rights in their integrity. The normal period



of his tenancy was seven years, and at the end of it he became en



titled to the cattle which had been in his possession. Meantime



he had the advantage of employing them in tillage, and the Chief



on his part received the 'growth and increase and milk,' the



first two words implying the young and the manure. So far there



is nothing very remarkable in the arrangement, but it is



expressly laid down that besides this it entitled the Chief to



receive homage and manual labour; manual labour is explained to



mean the service of the vassal in reaping the Chief's harvest and



in assisting to build his castle or fort, and it is stated that,



in lieu of manual labour, the vassal might be required to follow



his Chief to the wars. Any large addition to the stock deposited



with the Saer-stock tenant, or an unusual quantity accepted in



the first instance by the tribesman, created the relation between



vassal and chief called Daer-stock tenancy. The Daer-stock tenant



had unquestionably parted with some portion of his freedom, and



his duties are invariably referred to as very onerous. The stock



given to him by the Chief consisted of two portions, of which one



was proportionate to the rank of the recipient, the other to the



rent in kind to which the tenant became liable. The technical



standard of the first was the tenant's 'honor-price,' the fine or



damage which was payable for injuring him, and which in these



ancient systems of law varies with the dignity of the person



injured. The relation between the second portion of stock and the



rent is elaborately defined in the Brehon law: 'The proportionate



stock of a calf of the value of a sack with its accompaniments,



and refections for three persons in the summer, and work for



three days, is three "samhaisc" heifers or their value'



('Cain-Aigillne,' p. 25); or, in other words, that the Chief may



entitle himself to the calf, the refections, and the labour, he



must deposit three heifers with the tenant. 'The proportionate



stock of a "dartadh " heifer with its accompaniment, is twelve



"seds,"' explained to mean twelve 'samhaisc' heifers, or six



cows. And so on in many places. The rent in kind, or food-rent,



which was thus proportioned to the stock received, unquestionably



developed in time in to a rent payable in respect of the tenant's



land; but it is certainly a curious and unexpected fact that the



rent of the class which is believed to have embraced a very large



part of the ancient Irish tenantry did not, in its earliest form,



correspond in any way to the value of the tenant's land, but



solely to the value of the Chief's property deposited with the



tenant. But the most burdensome obligation imposed on the



Daerstock tenant is that which, in the quotation just made by me,



is expressed by the word 'refections.' Beside the rent in kind



and the feudal services, the Chief who had given stock was



entitled to come, with a company of a certain number, and feast



at the Dear stock tenant's house, at particular periods, for a



fixed number of days. This 'right of refection,' and liability to



it, are among the most distinctive features of ancient Irish



custom, and their origin is probably to be explained by the



circumstance that the Irish Chief, though far more privileged



than his tenants, was little better housed and almost as poorly



furnished out, and could not have managed to consume at home the



provisions to which his gifts of stock entitled him. But the



practice had a most unhappy history. The Brehon law defines it



and limits it narrowly on all sides; but its inconvenience and



its tendency to degenerate into an abuse are manifest, and from



it are doubtless descended those oppressions which revolted such



English observers of Ireland as Spenser and Davis, the 'coin and



livery,' and the 'cosherings' of the Irish Chiefs, which they



denounce with such indignant emphasis. Perhaps there was no Irish



usage which seemed to Englishmen so amply to justify that which



as a whole I believe to have been a great mistake and a great



wrong, the entire judicial or legislative abolition of Irish



customs. The precautions by which the Brehon lawyers could fence



it in were not probably at any time very effectual, but, as I



before stated, they did what they could; and, moreover, as



defined by them, the relation out of which Daer-stock tenancy and



its peculiar obligations arose was not perpetual. After food-rent



and service had been rendered for seven years, if the Chief died,



the tenant became entitled to the stock; while, on the other



hand, if the tenant died, his heirs were partly, though not



wholly, relieved from their obligation. At the same time it is



very probable that Daer-stock tenancy, which must have begun in



the necessities of the tenant, was often from the same cause



rendered practically permanent.



    It has frequently been conjectured that certain incidents of



feudal tenure pointed back to some such system as the Brehon



tracts describe to us. The Heriot of English Copyhold tenure, the



'best beast' taken by the Lord on the death of a base tenant, has



been explained as an acknowledgment of the Lord's ownership of



the cattle with which he anciently stocked the land of his



villeins, just as the Heriot of the military tenant is believed



to have had its origin in a deposit of arms. Adam Smith



recognised the great antiquity of the Metayer tenancy, still



widely spread over the Continent, of which one variety was in his



day found in Scotland under the name of 'steelbow.' I am not at



all surprised that, in one of the Prefaces to the official



translation of the Brehon laws, a comparison should be instituted



between this tenancy and the Saer and Daer-stock tenancy of



ancient Irish law. The outward resemblance is considerable, and



the history of Metayer tenancy is so obscure that I certainly



cannot undertake to say that practices answering to those I have



described had not in some countries something to do with its



primitive form. But the distinctions between the ancient and the



modern tenancies are more important than the analogies. In



Metayer tenancy a landlord supplies the land and stock, a tenant



the labour only and the skill; but in Saer and Daer-stock tenancy



the land belonged to the tenant. Again, the effect of the ancient



Irish relation was to produce, not merely a contractual



liability, but a status. The tenant had his social and tribal



position distinctly altered by accepting stock. Further, the



acceptance of stock was not always voluntary. A tribesman, in one



stage of Irish custom at all events, was bound to receive stock



from his own 'King,' or, in other words, from the Chief of his



tribe in its largest extension; and everywhere the Brehon laws



seem to me to speak of the acceptance of stock as a hard



necessity. Lastly, the Tribe to which the intending tenant



belonged had in some cases a Veto on his adoption of the new



position, which was clearly regarded as a proceeding invasive of



tribal rights and calculated to enfeeble them. In order to give



the Tribe the opportunity of interposing whenever it had legal



power to do so, the acceptance of stock had to be open and



public, and the consequences of effecting it surreptitiously are



elaborately set forth by the law. It seems to me clear that it



was discouraged by the current popular morality. One of those



rules, frequent in ancient bodies of law, which are rather moral



precepts than juridical provisions, declares that 'no man should



leave a rent on his land which he did not find there.'



    The system which I have been describing must have contributed



powerfully to dissolve the more ancient tribal and family



organisation. If the Chief who gave and the Ceile who accepted



stock belonged to the same Tribe, the effect of the transaction



was to create a relation between them, not indeed altogether



unlike that of tribal connection, but still materially different



from it in many respects and much more to the advantage of the



chieftain. But the superior from whom a man took stock was not



always the Chief of his own Sept or Tribe. So far as the Brehon



law can be said to show any favour to the new system of



vassalage, it encourages it between natural chief and natural



tribesman; and, on the other hand, it puts difficulties in its



way when there is an attempt to establish it between a tribesman



and a strange Chief. But there seem to be abundant admissions



that freemen did occasionally commend themselves in this way to



superiors other than their Chiefs. avery nobleman, as I said



before, is assumed to be as a rule rich in cattle, and it appears



to have been an object with everyone to disperse his herds by the



practice of giving stock. The enriched peasant who was on his way



to be ennobled, the Bo-Aire, seems to have had Ceiles who



accepted stock from him, as well as had the nobles higher in



degree. Accordingly, the new groups formed of the Lord and his



Vassals -- if we may somewhat antedate these last words -- were



sometimes wholly distinct from the old groups composed of the



Chief and his Clan. Nor, again, was the new relation confined to



Aires, or noblemen, and Ceiles, or free but non-noble tribesmen.



The Bo-Aire certainly, and apparently the higher Chiefs also,



accepted stock on occasion from chieftains more exalted than



themselves; and in the end to 'give stock' came to mean the same



thing as to assert feudal superiority, and to 'accept stock' the



same thing, which in the language of other societies was called



'commendation.' It is strong evidence of the soundness of the



conclusions reached of late years by historical scholars (and,



among others, by Mr Bryce), as to the deep and wide influence



exercised by the Roman Empire, even in its later form, that (of



course by a fiction) the Brehon law represents the King of



Ireland as 'accepting stock' from the Emperor. 'When the King of



Erin is without opposition' -- that is, as the explanation runs,



when he holds the ports of Dublin, Waterford, and Limerick, which



were usually in the hands of the Danes -- 'he receives stock from



the King of the Romans' (S. M., ii. 225). The commentary goes on



to say that sometimes' it is by the successor of Patrick that the



stock is given to the King of Erin; 'and this remarkable passage



seems to show that an Irish writer spoke of the successor of St



Patrick, where a writer of the same approximate period in England



or on the European Continent would assuredly have spoken of the



Pope.



    I hope it is unnecessary for me to insist on the interest



which attaches to this part of the Brehon law, it has been not



uncommon, upon the evidence furnished by the usages of the



Scottish Highlanders, sharply to contrast Celtic tribal customs



with feudal rules; and doubtless between these customs and



feudalism in its perfected state there are differences of the



greatest importance. Yet, if the testimony of the Brehon tracts



may be trusted, such differences arose, not from essential



distinctions, but, in some measure at all events, from



distinctions of degree in comparative social development. The



germs of feudalism lay deep in the more ancient social forms, and



were ready to assert their vitality even in a country like



Ireland, which, after it was once Christianised, can have



borrowed next to no institutions from its neighbours, cut off as



it was from the Continent by distance, and from England by



stubborn national repulsion. It is also worthy of observation



that this natural growth of feudalism was not, as some eminent



recent writers have supposed, entirely distinct from the process



by which the authority of the Chief or Lord over the Tribe or



Village was extended, but rather formed part of it. While the



unappropriated waste-lands were falling into his domain, the



villagers or tribesmen were coming through natural agencies under



his personal power.



    The Irish practice of 'giving stock' seems to me also to



connect itself with another set of phenomena which have generally



been thought to belong to a very different stage of history. We



obtain from the law-tracts a picture of an aristocracy of wealth



in its most primitive form; and we see that the possession of



this wealth gave the nobles an immense power over the non-noble



freemen who had nothing but their land. Caesar seems to me to be



clearly referring to the same state of relations in the Celtic



sister society, when he speaks of the Gaulish chiefs, the



Equites, having one principal source of their influence in the



number of their debtors. (B. G., i. 4; B. G., vi. 13.) Now, you



will remember how uniformly, when our knowledge of the ancient



world commences, we find plebeian classes deeply indebted to



aristocratic orders. At the beginning of Athenian history we find



the Athenian commonalty the bondslaves through debt of the



Eupatrids; at the beginning of Roman history we find the Roman



Commons in money bondage to the Patricians. The fact has been



accounted for in many ways, and it has been plausibly suggested



that it was the occurrence of repeated bad seasons which placed



the small farmers of the Attic and Roman territory at the mercy



of wealthy nobles. But the explanation is imperfect unless we



keep in mind the chief lesson of these Brehon tracts, and



recollect that the relative importance of Land and Capital has



been altering throughout history. The general proposition that



Land is limited in quantity and is distinguished by this



limitation from all other commodities which are practically



capable of indefinite multiplication, has always of course been



abstractedly true; but, like many other principles of Political



Economy, its value depends on the circumstances to which it is



applied. In very ancient times land was a drug, while capital was



extremely perishable, added to with the greatest difficulty, and



lodged in very few hands. The proportionate importance of the two



requisites of cultivation changed very slowly, and it is only



quite recently that in some countries it has been well-nigh



reversed. The ownership of the instruments of tillage other than



the land itself was thus, in early agricultural communities, a



power of the first order, and, as it may be believed that a stock



of the primitive capital larger than usual was very generally



obtained by plunder, we can understand that these stocks were



mostly in the hands of noble classes whose occupation was war,



and who at all events had a monopoly of the profits of office.



The advance of capital at usurious interest, and the helpless



degradation of the borrowers, were the natural results of such



economical conditions. For the honour of the obscure and



forgotten Brehon writers of the Cain-Saerrath and the



Cain-Aigillne, let it not be forgotten that their undertaking was



essentially the same as that which went far to immortalise one



great Athenian legislator. By their precise and detailed



statements of the proportion which is to be preserved between the



stock which the Chief supplies and the returns which the tenant



pays, they plainly intend to introduce certainty and equity into



a naturally oppressive system. Solon, dealing with a state of



society in which coined money had probably not long taken the



place of something like the 'seds' of the Brehon law, had no



expedient open to him but the debasement of the currency and the



cancellation of debts; but he was attacking the same evil as the



Brehon lawyers, and equally interfering with that freedom of



contract which wears a very different aspect according to the



condition of the society in which it prevails.



    The great part played in the Brehon law by Cattle as the



oldest form of Capital ought further to leave no doubt of the



original objects of the system of 'eric'-fines, or pecuniary



composition for violent crime. As I said before, no Irish



institution was so strongly denounced by Englishmen as this, or



with so great a show of righteous indignation. As members of a



wealthy community, long accustomed to a strong government, they



were revolted partly by its apparent inadequacy and partly the



unjust impunity which it seemed to give to the rich man and to



deny to the poor. Although the English system of criminal



penalties which they sought to substitute for the Irish system of



compositions would nowadays be described by an ordinary writer in



pretty much as dark colours as those used by Spenser and Davis



for the Irish institution, it is very possible that in the



sixteenth century it would have been an advantage to Ireland to



have the English procedure and the English punishments. There is



much evidence that the usefulness of 'eric'-fines had died out,



and that they unjustly profited the rich and powerful. But that



only shows that the confusions of Ireland had kept alive beyond



its time an institution which in the beginning had been a great



step forwards from barbarism. If the modern writers who have



spoken harshly of these pecuniary compositions had come upon a



set of usages belonging to a society in which tribe was



perpetually struggling with tribe, and in which life was held



extraordinarily cheap, and had found that, by this customary law,



the sept or family to which the perpetrator of a crime belonged



forfeited a considerable portion of its lauds, I am not sure that



they would not have regarded the institution as showing for the



age an extremely strict police. But in the infancy of society a



fine on the cultivating communities, of the kind afterwards



called pecuniary, was a much severer punishment than the



forfeiture of land. They had plenty of land within their domains,



but very slight appliances for cultivating it; and it was out of



these last that compositions were paid. The system of course lost



its meaning as the communities broke up and as property became



unequally divided. In its day, nevertheless, it had been a great



achievement, and there are traces of it everywhere, even in Roman



law, where, however, it is a mere survival.



    Before I quit the subject let me say something on the



etymology of the famous word, Feodum, Feud, or Fief. The



derivation from Emphyteusis is now altogether abandoned, and



there is general, though not quite universal, agreement that



Feodum is descended from one or other of the numerous family of



old Teutonic terms which have their present representative in the



modern German Vieh, 'cattle.' There is supposed to have been much



the same transmutation of meaning which occurred with the



analogous Latin word. Pecunia, allied to pecus, signified first



money, and then property generally; the Roman lawyers, in fact,



tell us that it is the most comprehensive term for all a man's



property,' and in the same way 'feodum' is supposed to have come



to mean 'property,' from having originally meant 'cattle.' The



investigations we have been pursuing may perhaps, however,



suggest that the connection of 'feodum' with cattle is closer and



more direct than this theory assumes. Dr Sullivan, I ought to



add, assigns a different origin to 'feodum' from any hitherto put



forward (Introd. p. ccxxvi). He claims it as a Celtic word, and



connects it with fuidhir, the name of a class of denizens on



tribal territory whose status I am about to discuss.



    The territory of every Irish tribe appears to have had



settled on it, besides the Saer and Daer Ceiles, certain classes



of persons whose condition was much newer to slavery than that of



the free tribesman who, by accepting stock from the Chief, had



sunk lowest from his original position in the tribal society.



They are called by various names, Sencleithes, Bothachs, and



Fuidhirs; and the two last classes are again subdivided, like the



Ceiles, into Saer and Daer Bothachs, and Saer and Daer Fuidhirs.



There is evidence in the tracts, and especially in the



unpublished tract called the 'Corus Fine,' that the servile



dependants, like the freemen of the territory, had a family or



tribal organisation; and indeed all fragments of a society like



that of ancient Ireland take more or less the shape of the



prevailing model. The position of the classes, obscurely



indicated in Domesday and other ancient English records as Cotwii



and Bordarii, was probably very similar to that of the



Sencleithes and Bothachs; and in both cases it has been suspected



that these servile orders had an origin distinct from that of the



dominant race, and belonged to the older or aboriginal



inhabitants of the country. Families or sub-tribes formed out of



them were probably hewers of wood and drawers of water to the



ruling tribe or its subdivisions. Others were certainly in a



condition of special servitude to the Chief or dependence on him;



and these last were either engaged in cultivating his immediate



domain-land and herding his cattle, or were planted by him in



separate settlements on the waste land of the tribe. The rent or



service which they paid to him for the use of this land was



apparently determinable solely by the pleasure of the Chief.



    Much the most important, and much the most interesting of



these classes from the historical point of view, was that just



described as settled by the Chief on the unappropriated tribal



lands. Indeed, it has been suggested that its fortunes are



identical with those of the great bulk of the Irish people. It



consisted of the Fuidhirs, the strangers or fugitives from other



territories, men, in fact, who had broken the original tribal



bond which gave them a place in the community, and who had to



obtain another as best they might in a new tribe and a new place.



The Brehon law shows by abundant evidence that the class must



have been a numerous one. The desertion of their lands by



families or portions of families is repeatedly spoken of. Under



certain circumstances, indeed, the rupture of the tribal bond and



the flight of those who break it are eventualities distinctly



contemplated by the law. In the Brehon law, as in other ancient



juridical systems, the corporate responsibility of tribes,



sub-tribes, and families takes the place of that responsibility



for crime, and even to some extent of civil obligation, which,



under modern institutions, presses upon the individual. But the



responsibility might be prevented from attaching by compelling or



inducing a member of the group, habitually violent or vowed to



revenge, to withdraw from its circle; and the Book of Aicill



gives the legal procedure which is to be observed in the



expulsion, the tribe paying certain fines to the Chief and the



Church and proclaiming the fugitive. Such provisions assume a



certain order in the society to which they apply; yet we know as



a fact that for many centuries it was violently disordered. The



result was probably to fill the country with 'broken men,' and



such men could only find a home and protection by becoming



Fuidhir tenants. Everything, in short, which tended to disturb



the Ireland of the Brehon laws tended to multiply this particular



class.



    Now, the Fuidhir tenant was exclusively a dependant of the



Chief, and waS through him alone connected with the Tribe. The



responsibility for crime, which in the natural state of Irish



society attached to the Family or Tribe, attached, in the case of



the Fuidhir, to the Chief, who in fact became to this class of



tenants that which their original tribesmen or kindred had been.



Moreover, the land which they cultivated in their place of refuge



was not theirs but his. They were the first 'tenants at will,



known to Ireland, and there is no doubt that they were always



theoretically rackrentable. The 'three rents,' says the Senchus



Mor, are the 'rackrent from a person of a strange tribe, a fair



rent from one of the tribe, and the stipulated rent which is paid



equally by the tribe and the strange tribe.' The 'person from a



strange tribe' is undoubtedly the Fuidhir; and though the Irish



expression translated 'rackrent' cannot, of course, in the



ancient state of relation between population and land, denote an



extreme competition rent, it certainty indicates an extreme rent;



since in one of the glosses it is graphically compared to the



milk of a cow which is compelled to give milk every month to the



end of the year, At the same time there is no reason to suppose



that, in the first instance, the Fuidhir tenants were



oppressively treated by the Chiefs. The Chief had a strong



interest in encouraging them; 'he brings in Fuidhirs,' says one



of the tracts, to increase his wealth.' The interests really



injured were those of the Tribe, which may have become stronger



for defence or attack by the addition to the population of the



territory, but which certainly suffered as a body of joint



proprietors by the curtailment of the waste land available for



pasture. The process before described by which the status of the



tribesmen declined proportionately to the growth of the Chiefs'



powers, must have been indirectly hastened in several ways by the



introduction of Fuidhirs. Such indications of the course of



change as the Brehon laws furnish are curiously in harmony with a



passage from a work recently published, which, amid much other



valuable matter, gives a most vivid picture of agricultural life



in the backward Indian province of Orissa. Mr Hunter, the writer,



is speaking of the relation of landlord and tenant; but as the



'hereditary peasantry' referred to have, as against their



landlord, rights defined by law, they are not without analogy to



the tribesmen of an ancient Irish territory. 'The migratory



husbandman,' the Fuidhir of modern India, 'not only lost his



hereditary position in his own village, but he was an object of



dislike and suspicion among the new community into which he



thrust himself. For every accession of cultivators tended to



better the position of the landlord, and pro tanto to injure that



of the (older) cultivators. So long as the land on an estate



continued to be twice as much as the hereditary peasantry could



till, the resident husbandmen were of too much importance to be



bullied or squeezed into discontent. But once a large body of



immigrant cultivators had grown up, this primitive check on the



landlords' exactions was removed. The migratory tenants,



therefore, not only lost their position in their old villages,



but they were harassed in their new settlements. Worse than all,



they were to a certain extent confounded with the landless low



castes who, destitute of the local connections so keenly prized



in rural society as the evidences of respectability, wandered



about as hired labourers and temporary cultivators of surplus



village lands.' (Hunter, 'Orissa,' i. 57, 58)



    You will perhaps have divined the ground of the special



attention which has been claimed for these Fuidhir tenants, and



will be prepared to hear that their peculiar status has been



supposed to have a bearing on those agrarian difficulties which



have recurred with almost mysterious frequency in the history of



Ireland. It is certainly a striking circumstance that in the far



distance of Irish tradition we come upon conflicts between



rent-paying and rent-receiving tribes -- that, at the first



moment when our information respecting Ireland becomes full and



trustworthy, our informants dwell with indignant emphasis on the



'racking' of tenants by the Irish Chiefs -- and that the relation



of Irish landlord and Irish tenant, after being recognised ever



since the beginning of the century as a social difficulty of the



first magnitude, finally became a political difficulty , which



was settled only the other day. I do not say that there is not a



thread of connection between these stages of Irish agrarian



history, but there are two opposite errors into which we may be



betrayed if we assume the thread to have been uniform throughout.



In the first place, we may be tempted to antedate the influence



of those economical laws which latterly had such powerful



operation in Ireland until their energy was well-nigh spent



through the consequences of the great famine of 1845-6. An



overflowing population and a limited area of cultivable land had



much to do, and probably more than anything else to do, with the



condition of Ireland during that period; but neither the one nor



the other was a characteristic of the country at the end of the



sixteenth century. Next, we may perhaps be inclined, as some



writers of great merit seem to me to be, to post-date the social



changes which caused so large a portion of the soil of Ireland to



be placed under the uncontrolled Law of the Market, or, to adopt



the ordinary phraseology, which multiplied 'tenants at will' to



an unusual extent. Doubtless, if we had to found an opinion as to



these causes exclusively on ancient Irish law, and on modern



English real property law, we should perhaps come to the



conclusion that an archaic system, barely recognising absolute



ownership, had been violently and unnaturally replaced by a



system of far more modern stamp based upon absolute property in



land. But, by the end of the sixteenth century, our evidence is



that the Chiefs had already so much power over their tenants that



any addition to it is scarcely conceivable. 'The Lords of land,'



says Edmund Spenser, writing not later than 1596, 'do not there



use to set out their land to farme, for tearme of years, to their



tenants, but only from yeare to yeare, or during pleasure,



neither indeed will the Irish tenant or husbandman otherwise take



his land than so long as he list himselfe. The reason thereof in



the tenant is, for that the landlords there use most shamefully



to racke their tenants, laying upon them coin and livery at



pleasure, and exacting of them besides his covenants what he



pleaseth. So that the poore husbandman either dare not binde



himselfe to him for longer tearme, or thinketh, by his continuall



liberty of change, to keepe his landlord the rather in awe from



wronging of him. And the reason why the landlord will no longer



covenant with him is, for that he dayly looketh after change and



alteration, and hovereth in expectation of new worlds.' Sir John



Davis, writing rather before 1613, used still stronger language:



'The Lord is an absolute Tyrant and the Tennant a very slave and



villain, and in one respect more miserable than Bond Slaves. For



commonly the Bond Slave is fed by his Lord, but here the Lord is



fed by his Bond Slave.'



    There is very little in common bet ween the miserable



position of the Irish tenant here described and the footing of



even the baser sort of Ceiles, or villeins, who had taken stock



from the Chief. If the Brehon law is to be trusted, the Daer



Ceile was to be commiserated, rather because he had derogated



from his rights as a free tribesman of the same blood with the



Chief, than because he had exposed himself to unbridled



oppression. Besides paying dues more of the nature of modern



rent, he certainly stood under that unfortunate liability of



supplying periodical refection for his Chief and his followers.



But not only was the Mount of his dues settled by the law, but



the very size of the joints and the quality of the ale with which



he regaled his Chief were minutely and expressly regulated. And,



if one provision of the law is clearer than another, it is that



the normal period of the relation of tenancy or vassalage was not



one year, but seven years. How, then, are we to explain this



discrepancy ? Is the explanation that the Brehon theory never in



reality quite corresponded with the facts ? It may be so to some



extent, but the careful student of the Brehon tracts will be



inclined to think that the general bias of their writers was



rather towards exaggeration of the privileges of Chiefs than



towards Overstatement of the immunities of tribesmen. Is it, on



the other hand, likely that, as some patriotic Irishmen have



asserted, Spenser and Davis were under the influence of English



prejudice, and grossly misrepresented the facts of Irish life in



their day? Plenty of prejudice of a certain kind is disclosed by



their writings, and I doubt not that they were capable of



occasionally misunderstanding what they saw. Nothing, however,



which they have written suggests that they were likely wilfully



to misdescribe facts open to their observation. I can quite



conceive that some things in the relations of the Chiefs and



tenants escaped them, possibly a good deal of freely-given



loyalty on one side, and of kindliness and good humoured



joviality on the other. But that the Irish Chief had in their day



the power or right which they attribute to him cannot seriously



be questioned.



    The power of the Irish Chiefs and their severity to their



tenants in the sixteenth century being admitted, they have been



accounted for, as I before stated, by supposing that the Norman



nobles who became gradually clothed with Irish chieftainships --



the Fitzgeralds, the Burkes, and the Barrys -- abused an



authority which in native hands would have been subject to



natural limitations, and thus set an evil example to all the



Chiefs of Ireland. The explanation has not the antecedent



improbability which it might seem to have at first sight, but I



am not aware that there is positive evidence to sustain it. I owe



a far more plausible theory of the cause of change to Dr



Sullivan, who, in his Introduction (p. cxxvi), has suggested that



it was determined by the steady multiplication of Fuidhir



tenants. It must be recollected that this class of persons would



not be protected by the primitive or natural institutions



springing out of community of blood. The Fuidhir was not a



tribesman but an alien. In all societies cemented together by



kinship the position of the person who has lost or broken the



bond of union is always extraordinarily miserable. He has not



only lost his natural place in them, but they have no room for



him anywhere else. The wretchedness of the outcast in India,



understood as the man who has lost or been expelled from caste,



does not arise from his having been degraded from a higher to a



lower social standing, but from his having no standing whatever,



there being no other order of society open to receive him when he



has descended from his own. It was true that the Fuidhir, though



he had lost the manifold protection of his family and tribe, was



not actually exposed to violent wrong. From that he was protected



by the new Chief to whom he had attached himself, but between him



and this Chief there was nothing. The principle would always be



that he was at the mercy of the Chief. At the utmost, some usages



favourable to him might establish themselves through lapse of



time, but they would have none of the obligatory force belonging



to the rules which defined the rights of the Chief in respect of



his Saer-stock and Daerstock tenants. We can see that several of



the duties corresponding to these rights were of a kind to invite



abuse; much more certainly would obligations analogous to them,



but wholly imposed by the pleasure of the Chief, become cruelly



oppressive. The 'refections' of the Brehon law would, by a



miserable degradation, become (to borrow the language of Spenser



and Davis) coin and livery, cuttings, cosherings, and spendings,



in the case of the Fuidhirs. Meanwhile there were causes at work,



powerfully and for long periods of time, to increase the numbers



of this class. Even those Irishmen who believe that in the



distant past there was once a tolerably well-ordered Ireland



admit that for many centuries their country was racked with



perpetual disturbance. Danish piracies, intestine feuds,



Anglo-Norman attempts at conquest never consistently carried out



or thoroughly completed, the very existence of the Pale, and



above all the policy directed from it of playing off against one



another the Chiefs beyond its borders, are allowed by all to have



distracted the island with civil war, how ever the responsibility



for it is to be apportioned. But the process is one which must



have broken up tribes far and wide, and broken tribes imply a



multitude of broken men. Even in brief intervals of peace the



violent habits produced by constant disorder would bring about



the frequent expulsion by families of members for whom they



refused to remain responsible, and in the commoner eventuality of



war whole fragments would be from time to time torn away from



tribes and their atoms scattered in every part of Ireland. it is



therefore, a conjecture possessing a very high degree of



plausibility, that the tenantry of the Irish Chiefs whose



sufferings provoked the indignation of Spenser and Davis



consisted largely of Fuidhirs.



    The explanation may, however, be carried beyond this point.



You will bear in mind the passage quoted by me from Hunter's



'Orissa,' which shows how a tenantry enjoying hereditary rights



is injured, even under a Government which sternly compels peace



and order, by a large immigration of cultivators dependent on the



landlord or Zemnindar. They narrow the available waste land by



their appropriations; and, though they do not compete directly



for the anciently cultivated land with the tenants enjoying



hereditary rights, they greatly raise in the long run the



standard of rent, at the same time that they arm the landlord



with those powers of exacting it which in ancient Ireland



consisted in the strong hand of the Chief himself, and which



consist, in modern India, in the money which puts in motion the



arm of the law. I have no doubt whatever that a great



multiplication of Fuidhir tenants would always seriously alter



for the worse the position of the tenants by Saer-stock and I



Dear-stock tenure.
















