



Lecture V







The Chief and His Order







    Nothing seems to me to have been more clearly shown by recent



researches than the necessity of keeping apart the Tribe and the



Tribal Chief as distinct sources of positive institutions. The



lines of descent are constantly entwined, but each of them is



found to run up in the end to an independent origin. If I were to



apply this assertion to political history, I should be only



repeating much of what has been said by Mr Freeman in his



excellent work on 'Comparative Politics.' Confining myself to the



history of private institutions, let me observe that the



distinction which I have drawn should be carefully borne in mind



by those who desire to penetrate to the beginnings of Property in



Land. The subject has been greatly obscured by the practice, now



brought home to the early writers on feudal law, of



systematically passing over or misconstruing all forms of



proprietary enjoyment which they could not explain on their own



principles; and hitherto the truth has only been directly seen



through some of the rules of tenure. It may now, however, be laid



down without rashness that Property in Land, as known to



communities of the Aryan race, has had a twofold origin. It has



arisen partly from the disentanglement of the individual rights



of the kindred or tribesmen from the collective rights of the



Family or Tribe, and partly from the growth and transmutation of



the sovereignty of the Tribal Chief. The phenomena attributable



to the double process seem to me easily distinguishable from one



another. Both the sovereignty of the Chief and the ownership of



land by the Family or Tribe were in most of Western Europe passed



through the crucible of feudalism; but the first reappeared in



some well-marked characteristics of military or knightly tenures,



and the last in the principal rules of non-noble holdings, and



among them of Socage, the distinctive tenure of the free farmer.



The status of the Chief has thus left us one bequest in the rule



of Primogeniture, which, however, has long lost its most ancient



form; another in the right to receive certain dues and to enforce



certain monopolies; and a third in a specially absolute form of



property which was once exclusively enjoyed by the Chief, and



after him by the Lord, in the portion of the tribal territory



which formed his own domain. On the other hand, several systems



of succession after death, and among them the equal division of



the land between the children, have sprung out of tribal



ownership in various stages of decay; and it has left another set



of traces (not quite so widely extended), in a number of minute



customary rules which govern tillage and occasionally regulate



the distribution of the produce.



    The fate of this double set of institutions in England and in



France appears to me most instructive. I have frequently dwelt in



this place on the erroneousness of the vulgar opinion which dates



the extreme subdivision of the soil of France from the first



French Revolution, and from the sale of the Church lands and of



the estates of the emigrant nobility. A writer -- I was going to



say as commonly read as Arthur Young, but certainly as often



mentioned as if he were commonly read -- notices this



morcellement, on the very eve of the French Revolution, and



immediately after it, as the great feature which distinguished



France from England. 'From what we see in England,' he says,



('Travels in 1787, '88, and, '89' p. 407) ' we cannot form an



idea of the abundance in France of small properties, that is,



little farms belonging to those who cultivate them.' He estimates



that more than a third of the kingdom was occupied by them -- a



very large proportion, when the extent of Church land in France



is taken into account; but recent French investigations have



shown reasons for thinking that the true proportion was still



larger, and that it was rather growing than diminishing, through



that extravagance of the nobles which Court life fostered, and



which compelled them to sell their domains to peasants in small



parcels. Young clearly saw that this subdivision of the soil was



the result of some legal rule; and strongly dissenting from the



Revolutionary leaders who wished to carry it farther, he declared



that 'a law ought to be passed to render all division below a



certain number of arpents illegal.'



    It seems to have very generally escaped notice that the law



of equal or nearly equal division after death was the general law



of France. The rule of primogeniture was of exceptional



application, and was for the most part confined to lands held by



knightly tenure; indeed, in the South of France, where the custom



of equal division was strengthened by the identical rule of the



Roman jurisprudence, the privileges of the eldest son were only



secured by calling in the exceptional rules of which the Roman



Law gives the benefit to milites (or soldiers on service) when



making their wills or regulating their successions, and by laying



down that every chevalier, and every noble of higher degree, was



a miles within the meaning of the Roman juridical writers. The



two systems of succession and the two forms of property lay side



by side, and there were men alive quite recently who could



remember the bitter animosities caused by their co-existence and



antagonism. A very great part of the land held by laymen belonged



to the peasantry, and descended according to the rule of equal



division, but eldest son after eldest son succeeded to the



signory. Yet it was not the rule of primogeniture followed in



noble descents which was the true grievance; at most it became a



grievance under the influence of the peculiar vein of sentiment



introduced by Rousseau. The legacy from tribal sovereignty to



signorial privilege, which was really resented, was that which I



placed second in order. The right to receive feudal dues and to



enforce petty monopolies, now almost extinguished in England by



the measures to which the Copyhold Commission has given effect,



had ceased long before the end of the last century to be of any



considerable importance to the class which was invested with it;



but M. de Tocqueville has explained, in his 'Ancien Régime' (i.



18), that it made up almost the entire means of living which the



majority of the French nobility possessed. A certain number of



noblemen, besides their feudal rights, had their terres, or



domain, belonging to them in absolute property, and sometimes of



enormous extent; and the wealthiest members of this limited



class, the grands, who so frequently appear in French Court



history, but who, away from the Court, were much the most



respected and beloved of their order, formed the counterpart,



from the legal point of view, of the English landed proprietary.



The rest of the nobles lived mainly, not on rent, but on their



feudal dues, and eked out a meagre subsistence by serving the



King in arms. The sense of property in the soil was thus not in



the lord but in the peasantry; and the peasantry viewed the



exercise of signorial rights with a feeling closely akin to that



which is inspired by a highly oppressive tax. The condition of



sentiment produced by it is even now a political force of some



moment in France; and a similar, though a far weaker, repulsion



is known to have been caused in this country by the taking of



tithes in kind. It is a significant fact that, where the



ownership is acknowledged to reside in the superior holder, the



exaction of even an extreme rent from the tenants below has very



rarely been regarded with the same bitterness of resentment.



    The change, therefore, which took place in France at the



first Revolution was this: the land-law of the people superseded



the land-law of the nobles, In England the converse process has



been gone through, and what has occurred is obviously in harmony



with much else in English history. The system of the nobles has



become in all essential particulars the system of the people. The



rule of primogeniture, which once applied only to knightly



holdings, came to apply to the great bulk of English tenures,



except the Gavelkind of Kent and some others of merely local



importance. This part of the change took place at a remote epoch,



and its circumstances are involved in much obscurity; and we know



little more of it with certainty than that it was rapidly



proceeding between the time at which Glanville and the time at



which Bracton wrote. Glanville, probably not earlier than the



thirty-third year of Henry the Second's reign, expresses himself



as if the general rule of law caused lands held by free



cultivators in socage to be divided equally between all the male



children at the death of the last owner; Bracton, probably not



later than the fifty-second year of Henry the Third, writes as if



the rule of primogeniture applied universally to military tenures



and generally to socage tenures. But another branch of the



process was postponed almost to our own day. Possibly not many



Englishmen have recognised with as much clearness as a recent



French writer (Doniol, 'La Revolution Française et la Féodalit*')



that the transmutation of customary and copyhold into freehold



property, which has been proceeding for about forty years under



the conduct of the Copyhold and Enclosure Commissioners, is the



peaceful and insensible removal of a grievance which did more



than any other to bring about the first French Revolution and to



prevent the re-establishment of the ancient political order. But



long before there was a Copyhold Commission, the great mass of



English landed property had assumed certain characteristics which



strongly distinguished it from the peasant property of the



Continent as it existed before it was affected by the French



Codes, and as it is still found in some countries. This last form



of proprietorship was very generally fettered by the duty of



cultivation in some particular way, and, as a rule, could not be



dealt with so as to bar the rights reserved to the children and



widow of the owner by the law of succession. The traces of a



similar species of ownership, probably once widely diffused, may



still be here and there discerned through the customs of



particular English manors. I repeat the opinion which I expressed



three years ago, that our modern English conception of absolute



property in land is really descended from the special



proprietorship enjoyed by the Lord, and more anciently by the



tribal Chief, in his own Domain. It would be out of place to



enter here on a discussion of the changes which seem to me



desirable in order to make the soil of England as freely



exchangeable as the theory now generally accepted demands; but to



the principle of several and absolute property in land I hold



this country to be committed. I believe I state the inference



suggested by all known legal history when I say that there can be



no material advance in civilisation unless landed property is



held by groups at least as small as Families; and I again remind



you that we are indebted to the peculiarly absolute English form



of ownership for such an achievement as the cultivation of the



soil of North America.



    Before describing to you the new light which the Ancient Laws



of Ireland throw on the primitive condition of the institutions



of which I have been speaking, let me give you one word of



caution as to the statements of modern Irish writers respecting



the original relations of the Irish Tribe and of the Irish Tribal



Chief. Unhappily the subject has been discussed in the spirit of



the later agrarian history of Ireland. On the one hand, some



disputants have thought to serve a patriotic purpose by



contending that the land of each Tribe belonged absolutely to



itself and was its common property, and that the Chief was a mere



administrative officer, rewarded for his services in making a



fair distribution of the territory among the tribesmen by a



rather larger share of its area than the rest, which was allotted



to him as his domain. Contrariwise, some writers, not perhaps



actuated by much kindliness to the Irish people, have at least



suggested that they were always cruelly oppressed by their



superiors, and probably by their natural chiefs more than any



others. These authors point to the strong evidence of oppression



by the Chiefs which the books of the English observers of Ireland



contain. Edmund Spenser and Sir John Davis cannot have merely



intended to calumniate the Irish native aristocracy when they



emphatica1ly declared that the 'chiefs do most shamefully



rackrent their tenants,' and spoke with vehement indignation of



the exactions from which the tribesmen suffered, the 'coshering,'



and the 'coin and livery,' which occur over and over again in



their pages. A third school, of a very different order from



these, has representatives among the most learned Irishmen of our



day. They resent the assertion that the land belonged to the



tribe in common as practically imputing to the ancient Irish that



utter barbarism to which private property is unknown. They say



that traces of ownership jealously guarded are found in all parts



of the Brehon laws, and they are on the whole apt to speak of the



vassalage to the Chief which these laws attribute to the



tribesmen as if it implied something like modern tenancy in the



latter and modern ownership in the former. But they say that the



relation of landlord and tenant was regulated by careful and



kindly provisions, and they ascribe the degradation of the



system, like the other evils of Ireland, to English cupidity and



ignorance. The Norman nobles who first settled in Ireland are



well known to have become in time Chieftains of Irish Tribes; and



it is suggested that they were the first to forget their duties



to their tenants and to think of nothing but their privileges.



Nor is there anything incredible in this last assumption. An



English settler in India who buys land there is often reputed a



harder landlord than the native zemindars, his neighbours, not



because he intends to be harsher (indeed in some things he is



usually far more considerate and bountiful), but because he is



accustomed to a stricter system and cannot accommodate himself to



the loose and irregular play of relations between native



landowner and native tenant.



    I cannot wholly concur in any one of these theories



concerning Chief and Tribe. Each seems to me to contain a portion



of truth, but not the whole. Let me first say that the whole



land-system shadowed forth in the Brehon laws does seem to me to



have for its basis the primary ownership of the tribe-land by the



Tribe. It is also true that the Chief appears to exercise certain



administrative duties in respect of this land, and that he has a



specific portion of the tribe-land allotted to him, in the



vicinity of his residence or stronghold, for the maintenance of



his household and relatives. But this is not all. As we see the



system through the law, it is not stationary, but shifting,



developing, disintegrating, re-combining. Even according to the



texts apparently oldest, much of the tribal territory appears to



have been permanently alienated to sub-tribes, families, or



dependent chiefs; and the glosses and commentaries show that,



before they were written, this process had gone very far indeed.



Whatever, again, may have been the original dignity and authority



of the Chief, they are plainly growing, not merely through the



introduction of alien principles and ideas, but from natural



causes, more or less operative all over Europe. The general



character of these causes is very much the same as in the



Germanic countries. The power of the Chief grows first through



the process which is called elsewhere 'commendation,' the process



by which the free tribesman becomes 'his man,' and remains in a



state of dependence having various degrees. It farther grows from



his increasing authority over the waste-lands of the tribal



territory and from the servile or semi-servile colonies he plants



there; and lastly, it augments from the material strength which



he acquires through the numbers of his immediate retainers and



associates, most of whom stand to him in more or less servile



relations. But the Brehon law tells us much that is novel and



surprising concerning the particular course of these changes and



their nature in detail. It furnishes us with some wholly new



ideas concerning the pas sage of society from inchoate to



complete feudalism, and helps us to complete the account of it



derived from Germanic sources. In this, as it seems to me, the



greatest part of its interest consists.



    With the Chieftaincy of the Tribe the early history of modern



Aristocracy and modern Kingship begins. These two great



institutions had, in fact, at first the same history, and the



Western world long continued to bear the marks of their original



identity. The Manor with its Tenemental lands held by the free



tenants of the Lord, and with its Domain which was in immediate



dependence on him, was the type of all the feudal sovereignties



in their complete form, whether the ruler acknowledged a superior



above him or whether he at most admitted one in the Pope, or the



Emperor, or God himself. In every County, or Dukedom, or Kingdom



there were great tenants holding directly of its head and on some



sort of parity with him; and there was a Domain under his more



immediate government and at his immediate disposal. There is no



obscurer and more difficult subject than the origin of the class



whose power was the keystone of all these political and



proprietary constructions, and none on which the scantiest



contributions to our knowledge are more welcome.



    There is one view of the original condition of privileged



classes which, though held by learned men, has been a good deal



weakened of late by German research, and seems to me still



farther shaken by portions of the Brehon law. This is the



impression that they always constituted, as they practically do



now, a distinct class or section of the community, each member of



the class standing in a closer relation to the other members than



to the rest of the national or tribal society to which all



belong. It cannot be doubted that the earliest modern



aristocracies have as a fact, when they are first discerned, this



particular aspect. Mr Freeman ('Norman Conquest,' i. 88) says



that the 'difference between eorl and ceorl is a primary fact



from which we start.' Tacitus plainly distinguished the noble



from the non-noble freeman in the Germanic societies which he



observed; and Caesar, as I stated in another Lecture, divides all



the Continental Celtic tribes into the Equites and the Plebs. We



can understand that a spectator looking at a set of tribal



communities from the outside would naturally class together all



men visibly exalted above the rest; but nevertheless this is not



quite the appearance which early Germanic society wears in the



eyes of enquirers who follow the method of Von Maurer and Landau.



Each Chief or Lord appears to them to have been noble less with



reference to other noblemen than with reference to the other free



tribesmen comprised in the same group with himself. Nobility has



many diverse origins; but its chief source seems to have been the



respect of co-villagers or assemblages of kinsmen for the line of



descent in which the purest blood of each little society was



believed to be preserved. Similarly, the Brehon law suggests that



the Irish Chiefs were not the class by themselves which the



corresponding order among the Continental Celts appeared to



Caesar to be, but were necessarily the heads of separate groups



composed of their kindred or of their vassals. 'Every chief,'



says the text which I quoted before, 'rules over his land,



whether it be great or whether it be small.' And while the Irish



law describes the way (as I shall point out) in which a common



freeman can become a chief, it also shows that the position to



which he attains is the presidency of a group of dependants.



Nevertheless the persons thus elevated undoubtedly tend to



become, from various causes, a class by themselves and a special



section of the general community; and it is very probable that



the tendency was at work from the earliest times. It is farther



to be remarked that some aristocracies were really a section of



the community from the very first. This structure of society is



produced where one entire tribal group conquers or imposes its



supremacy upon other tribal groups also remaining entire, or



where an original body of tribesmen, villagers, or citizens,



gradually gathers round itself a miscellaneous assemblage of



protected dependants. There are many known instances of both



processes, and the particular relation of tribal groups which the



former implies was certainly not unknown to the Celtic societies.



Among the Scottish Highlanders some entire septs or clans are



stated to have been enslaved to others; and on the very threshold



of Irish history we meet with a distinction between free and



rent-paying tribes which may possibly imply the same kind of



superiority and subordination.



    The circumstance of greatest novelty in the position of the



Chief which the Brehon law appears to me to bring out is this:



Whatever else a Chief is, he is before all things a rich man;



not, however, rich, as popular assoCiations would lead us to



anticipate, in land, but in live stock -- in flocks and herds, in



sheep, and before all things in oxen. Here let me interpose the



remark, that the opposition commonly set up between birth and



wealth, and particularly wealth other than landed property, is



entirely modern. In French literature, so far as my knowledge



extends, it first appears when the riches of the financial



officers of the French monarchy -- the Superintendents and



Farmers General -- begin to attract attention. With us it seems



to be exclusively the result of the great extension and



productiveness of industrial undertakings on the largest scale.



But the heroes of the Homeric poems are not only valiant but



wealthy (Odyss. xiv. 96-106); the warriors of the Nibelungen-Lied



are not only noble but rich. In the later Greek literature we



find pride of birth identified with pride in seven wealthy



ancestors in succession, epta pappoi plonsioi; and you are well



aware how rapidly and completely the aristocracy of wealth



assimilated itself in the Roman State to the aristocracy of



blood. Passing to the Irish Chief, we find the tract called the



'Cain-Aigillne' laying down (p. 279) that 'the head of every



tribe should be the man of the tribe who is the most experienced,



the most noble, the most wealthy, the most learned, the most



truly popular, the most powerful to oppose, the most steadfast to



sue for profits and to be sued for losses.' There are many other



passages to the same effect; and on closely examining the system



(as I propose to do presently) we can perceive that personal



wealth was the principal condition of the Chief's maintaining his



position and authority.



    But while the Brehon laws suggest that the possession of



personal wealth is a condition of the maintenance of



chieftainship, they show with much distinctness that through the



acquisition of such wealth the road was always open to



chieftainship. We are not altogether without knowledge that in



some European societies the humble freeman might be raised by



wealth to the position which afterwards became modern nobility.



One fact, among the very few which are tolerably well ascertained



respecting the specific origin of particular modern aristocracies



is, that a portion of the Danish nobility were originally



peasants; and there are in the early English laws some traces of



a process by which a Ceorl might become a Thane. These might be



facts standing by themselves, and undoubtedly there is strong



reason to suspect that the commencements of aristocracy were



multifold: but the Brehon tracts point out in several places,



with legal minuteness, the mode in which a peasant freeman in



ancient Ireland could become a chief. There are few personages of



greater interest spoken of in these laws than the Bo-Aire,



literally the 'cow-nobleman.' He is, to begin with, simply a



peasant who has grown rich in cattle, probably through obtaining



the use of large portions of tribe-land. The true nobles, or



Aires -- a word striking from its consonance with words of



similar meaning in the Teutonic languages -- are divided, though



we can scarcely believe the classification to correspond with an



universal fact, into seven grades. Each grade is distinguished



from the others by the amount of wealth possessed by the Chief



belonging to it, by the weight attached to his evidence, by his



power of binding his tribe by contracts (literally of



'knotting'), by the dues which he receives in kind from his



vassals according to a system to be presently described, and by



his Honor-Price, or special damages incurred by injuring him. At



the bottom of the scale is the chief or noble called the



Aire-desa; and the Brehon law provides that when the Bo-Aire has



acquired twice the wealth of an Aire-desa, and has held it for a



certain number of generations, he becomes an Aire-desa himself.



The advantage secured to wealth does not, you see, exclude



respect for birth, but works into it. 'He is an inferior chief,'



says the 'Senchus Mor,' 'whose father was not a chief;' and there



are many other strong assertions of the reverence due to



inherited rank. The primary view of chieftainship is evidently



that it springs from purity or dignity of blood, but noble birth



is regarded as naturally associated with wealth, and he who



becomes rich gradually climbs to a position indistinguishable



from that which he would have occupied if he had been nobly born.



What is thus new in the system is the clear account of nobility



as a status, having its origin in the organic structure of



ancient society, but nevertheless in practice having perpetually



fresh beginnings.



    The enormous importance which belongs to wealth and specially



to wealth in cattle, in the early Aryan society reflected by the



Brehon tracts, helps, I think, to clear up one great difficulty



which meets us on the threshold of an enquiry into the origin of



aristocracies. I suppose that the popular theory on the subject



of the privileged class in modern communities is that it was



originally indebted for its status, if not for its power or



influence, to kingly favour. An Englishman once questioned the



Emperor Paul of Russia on the position of the Russian nobility.



'The only man who is noble in my dominions,' said the Czar, 'is



the man to whom I speak, for the time that I am speaking to him.'



I merely take these words as the strongest possible statement of



the view to which I am referring; but they were used by a monarch



with a disturbed brain, whose authority had contracted something



of an Oriental character from its long subordination to Tartar



power, and they were never absolutely true even of Russia. Among



ourselves, however, the favourite assumption seems certainly to



be, however slight may be the practical consequences we draw from



it, that all aristocratic privilege had its origin in kingly



grace; and this appears, on the whole, to be the theory of



English law. But the institutions of many parts of the Continent



long retained the traces of a different set of ideas, and these



were found where kingly power was actually much greater than in



England. The French Noblesse, before the Revolution, would as a



body have resented the assertion that they were a creation of the



King, and the Kings of France more than once admitted that they



were only the most exalted members of a class to which their own



nobility belonged.



    Kings have everywhere nowadays, and in many countries have



had for centuries, a monopoly of the power of ennobling. This



road to nobility has been so long trodden, that men in general



have almost forgotten there ever was another route. Yet



historical scholars have long known that nobility conferred by



royal grant was, in one sense, a modern institution, though they



have not succeeded in completely explaining how it came to



supplant or dwarf the institution upon which it was engrafted.



There seems to be no doubt that the first aristocracy springing



from kingly favour consisted of the Comitatus, or Companions of



the King. Although there is a good deal of evidence that the



class was at first considered in some way servile, it gradually



became in some countries the type of all nobility. A few



tolerably familiar facts may serve to remind us how remarkable



has been the fortune of the royal households all over Western



Europe. The Mayor of the Frankish Palace became King of the



Franks. The Chamberlain of the Romano-German Emperors is now the



German Emperor. The blood of the Steward of Scotland runs in the



veins of the Kings of England. The Constables of France



repeatedly shook or saved the French throne. Among ourselves the



great officers of the Royal Council and Household still take



precedence either of all Peers or of all Peers of their own



degree. Whence, then, came this great exaltation of the Mayor or



Count of the Palace, of the great Seneschal or Steward, of the



high Chancellor, the Great Chamberlain, and High Constable --



titles which, when they do not mark an office originally



clerical, point to an occupation which must at first have been



menial?



    It seems certain that the household sprang from very humble



beginnings. Tacitus describes the companions of the Germanic



chief as living with him in his house and supported by his



bounty. Mr Stubbs when stating ('Constitutional History,' p. 150)



that 'the gesiths of an (English) king were his guard and private



council,' observes that the 'free household servants of a ceorl



are also in a certain sense his gesiths.' The Companions of the



King appear also in the Irish legal literature, but they are not



noble, and they are associated with the king's body-guard, which



is essentially servile. The King of Erin, though he never existed



(strictly speaking), save for short intervals, yet always, so to



speak tended to exist, and the Crith Gablach, a Brehon tract of



which a translation is given at the end of Sullivan's edition of



O'Curry's Lectures, contains a picture of his palace and state.



The edifice intended to be described is apparently very much the



same as the great Icelandic house of which Mr Dasent, in the



'Story of Burnt Njal,' has attempted to give a drawing from the



descriptions found in Norse literature. In it the King feasts his



guests, from kings and king's sons to a ghastly company of



prisoners in fetters, the forfeited hostages of subject-chiefs or



sub-septs who have broken their engagements. The Companions are



there also, and they are stated to consist of his privileged



tenantry and of his body guard, which is composed of men whom he



has delivered from death, jail, or servitude, never (a



significant exception) of men whom he has saved on the



battle-field. I am afraid that the picture of Irish society



supplied by the Crith Gablach must throughout be regarded as to a



great extent ideal or theoretical; at any rate, there is much



testimony from English visitors to Ireland that many considerable



Irish Chiefs were much more humbly furnished out than the King of



Erin at Tara. Yet it is very likely that they all had Companions



attending them, and I suspect that the obligation of. maintaining



a little court had much to do with that strange privilege which



in later times had a deplorable history; the right of the Chief



to go with a following to the dwellings of his tenants and there



be feasted at the tenant's expense. That even petty Chiefs of the



Scottish Highlands had a retinue of the same character is known



to all who can recall that immortal picture of Celtic society



which for the first time brought it home to men who were nearly



our contemporaries that ancient Celtic life and manners had



existed almost down to their days -- the novel of 'Waverley.'



    It seems extremely probable that, in a particular stage of



society, this personal service to the Chief or King was



everywhere rendered in expectation of reward in the shape of a



gift of land. The Companions of the Teutonic kings, in



Continental Europe, shared largely in the Benefices-grants of



Roman provincial land fully peopled and stocked. In ancient



England the same class are believed to have been the largest



grantees of public land next to the Church; and doubtless we have



here part of the secret of the mysterious change by which a new



nobility of Thanes, deriving dignity and authority from the King,



absorbed the older nobility of Eorls. But we are a little apt to



forget the plentifulness of land in countries lying beyond the



northern and western limits of the Roman Empire, or just within



them. Mr Thorold Rogers, writing of a period relatively much



later, and founding his opinion on the extant evidence of returns



from manor-lands, speaks of land as the 'cheapest commodity of



the Middle Ages.' The practical difficulty was not to obtain



land, but the instruments for making it productive; and hence, in



a society older relatively than any Teutonic society of which we



have any distinct knowledge, that very society which the Brehon



tracts enable us to understand, it may very well have been that



the object of suit at court was much less to obtain land than to



obtain cattle. The Chief, as I have already said, was before all



things rich in flocks and herds. He was military leader, and a



great part of his wealth must have been spoil of war, but in his



civil capacity he multiplied his kine through his growing power



of appropriating the waste for pasture, and through a system of



dispersing his herds among the tribesmen, which will be described



in the next Lecture. The Companion who followed him to the foray,



or was ready to do so, cannot but have been enriched by his



bounty; and thus, if already noble, he became greater; if he was



not noble, the way to nobility lay through wealth. The passage



which I am about to read to you may serve to illustrate what



probably took place, though there is nothing except common



humanity to connect the tribes of whose customs it speaks with



the primitive Teutons and Celts. The Rev H. Dugmore, in a most



interesting volume, called a 'Compendium of Kafir Laws and



Customs,' and published at the Wesleyan Missionary Press, Mount



Coke, British Kaffraria, writes thus of much the most advanced of



the South African native races, the Kafirs or Zulus (p. 27): 'As



cattle constitute the sole wealth of the people, so they are



their only medium of such transactions as involve exchange,



payment, or reward. The retainers of a chief serve him for



cattle; nor is it expected that he could maintain his influence,



or indeed secure any number of followers, if unable to provide



them with what at once constitutes their money, food, and



clothing. He requires, then, a constant fund from which to



satisfy his dependants; and the amount of the fund required may



be judged of from the character of the demand made upon him. His



retinue, court, or whatever it is to be called, consists of men



from all parts of the tribe, the young, the clever, and the



brave, who come to do court service for a time, that they may



obtain cattle to furnish them with the means of procuring wives,



arms, or other objects of desire. On obtaining these they return



to their homes and give place to others. Thus the immediate



retinue of a chief is continually changing, and constitutes a



permanent drain on his resources.' Mr Dugmore goes on to state



that the sources of the chief's wealth are the inherited cattle



of his father, offerings made to him on the ceremony of his



circumcision, benevolences levied from his tribe, fines and



confiscations, and the results of predatory excursions.



    The remarkable part played by kine in ancient Irish society



will, I hope, be made more intelligible in the next Lecture.



Meantime, let me observe that the two Celtic societies included



in these islands which longest retained their ancient usages were



both notoriously given to the plunder of cattle. Lord Macaulay,



in speaking of Irish cattle-stealing, sometimes, I must own,



seems to me to express himself as if he thought the practice



attributable to some native vice of Irish character; but no doubt



it was what Mr Tylor has taught us to call a survival, an ancient



and inveterate habit, which in this case continued through the



misfortune which denied to Ireland the great condition of modern



legal ideas, a strong central government. The very same practice,



among the Celts of the Scottish Highlands and the rude Germanic



population of the Lowland Border, has almost been invested by one



man's genius with the dignity of a virtue. Again, turning to



'Waverley,' I suppose there is no truer representative of the



primitive Celtic chief than Donald Bean Lean, who drives the



cattle of Tully Veolan, and employs a soothsayer to predict the



number of beeves which are likely to come in his Way. He is a far



more genuine 'survival' than Fergus McIvor, who all but deserts



his cause for a disappointment about an earldom.



    It has been pointed out that the status of the King's



Companions was at first in some way servile. Whenever legal



expression has to be given to the relations of the Comitatus to



the Teutonic kings, the portions of the Roman law selected are



uniformly those which declare the semi-servile relation of the



Client or Freedman to his Patron. The Brehon law permits us to



take the same view of the corresponding class in Celtic



societies. Several texts indicate that a Chief of high degree is



always expected to surround himself with unfree dependants; and



you will recollect that the retinue of the King of Erin was to



consist not only of free tribesmen but of a bodyguard of men



bound to him by servile obligations. So far as it goes, I quite



agree with the explanation which Mr Freeman has given of the



original connection between servile status and that nobility with



which the primitive nobility of birth has become mixed up and



confounded. 'The lowly clientage,' he says, 'of the Roman



Patrician and the noble following of the Hellenic and Teutonic



leader may really come from the same source, and may both alike



be parts of the same primeval heritage.' (' Comparative



Politics,' p. 261.) But perhaps we may permit ourselves to go a



step beyond this account. The Comitatus or Companions of the



Chief, even when they were freemen, were not necessarily Or



ordinarily his near kindred. Their dependence on him, carrying



with it friendship and affection, would in modern societies place



them in a position well understood, and on something like an



equality with him; but in the beginning of things one man was



always the kinsman, the slave, or the enemy of another, and mere



friendship and affection would, by themselves, create no tie



between man and man. In order that they might have any reality,



they would have to be considered as establishing one of the



relations known to that stage of thought. Between equals this



would be assumed or fictitious kinship. But between the Chief who



embodied purity of tribal descent and his associates, it would



have more or less to follow the pattern of the slave's dependence



on his master, and, where the Companion was not actually the



Chief's slave, the bond which connected them would very probably



be adapted to the more honourable model furnished by the relation



between ex-slave and ex-master.








