



Lecture IX







The Primitive Forms of Legal Remedies







                            I.







    I stated on a former occasion (Lecture 1. p. 8) that the



branch of law which we now call the Law of Distress occupies the



greatest part of the largest Brehon law-tract, the Senchus Mor.



The importance thus given to Distress is a fact of much



significance, and in this and the following Lecture I propose to



discuss the questions it raises and the conclusions it suggests.



    The value of the precious discovery made by Niebuhr, when he



disinterred in 1816 the manuscript of Gaius, does not solely



arise from the new light which was at once thrown on the



beginnings of the legal system which is the mountain of the



greatest part of civilised jurisprudence. There are portions of



the treatise then restored to the world which afford us glimpses



of something older than law itself, and which enable us to



connect with law the practices dictated to barbarous men by



impulses which it has become the prime office of all law to



control. At the head of the passages in the work of Gaius which



allow the mind's eye to penetrate some little way into the chaos



out of which social order sprang, I place the fragmentary and



imperfect account, given near the commencement of the Fourth



Book, of the old Legis Actiones, which in the age of Gaius



himself had ceased to have more than an historical and



antiquarian interest.



    Legis Actio, of which the exact meaning does not seem to have



been known to Gaius, may be conjectured to have been the



substantive form of the verbal expression, legem or lege agere,



and to have been equivalent to what we now call Procedure. It has



been several times observed that among the Legis Actiones are



included several proceedings which are not of the nature of



Actions or Suits, but are rather modes of executing decrees. The



fact seems to be that, by a course of change which may be traced



in the history of Roman law, one portion, 'Actio,' of the



venerable phrase 'Legis Actio' has been gradually disjoined from



the rest, and has come to denote that stage of the administration



of justice which is directly conducted by the Court, together, in



some judicial systems, with the stage immediately preceding it. I



suppose that originally lex, used of the assumed written basis of



Roman law, and legis actio, corresponded roughly to what many



centuries afterwards were called Substantive and Adjective Law,



the law declaring rights and duties and the rules according to



which the law declaring rights and duties is administered. On the



expression just mentioned, Adjective Law, with which Bentham and



his school have familiarised us, I will make a remark which



applies to much in the phraseology and classifications of the



Analytical Jurists, that it is correct and convenient according



to the ideas of their day, but that, if used of very old law, it



is apt to lead to an historical misconception. It would not be



untrue to assert that, in one stage of human affairs, rights and



duties are rather the adjective of procedure than procedure a



mere appendage to rights and duties. There have been times when



the real difficulty lay, not in conceiving what a man was



entitled to, but in obtaining it; so that the method, violent or



legal, by which an end was obtained was of more consequence than



the nature of the end itself. As a fact, it is only in the most



recent times or in the most highly developed legal systems that



remedies have lost importance in comparison with rights and have



ceased to affect them deeply and variously.



    The first and in many respects the most interesting of these



ancient modes of proceeding is the Legis Actio Sacramenti, the



undoubted parent of all the Roman Actions, and consequently of



most of the civil remedies now in use in the world. Several years



ago I pointed out (Ancient Law, pp. 376, 377) that the technical



formalities appeared plainly, upon inspection, to be a



dramatisation of the Origin of Justice. 'Two armed men,' I said,



'are wrangling about some disputed property. The Praetor, vir



pietate gravis, happens to be going by and interposes to stop the



contest. The disputants state their case to him, and agree that



he shall arbitrate between them, it being arranged that the



loser, besides resigning the subject of the quarrel, shall pay a



sum of money to the umpire as remuneration for his trouble and



loss of time.' 'This interpretation,' I then added, 'would be



less plausible than it is, were it not that, by a surprising



coincidence, the ceremony described by Gaius as the imperative



course of proceeding in a Legis Actio is substantially the same



with one of the two subjects which the God Hephaestus is



Described by Homer as moulding into the First Compartment of the



Shield of Achilles.' Singe these passages were written, the



labours of more recent enquirers enable us to class this judicial



picture of the origin of one great institution, Civil Justice,



with other pictorial or dramatic representations of forgotten



practices which, in various parts of the world, survive in the



forms attending institutions of at least equal importance. It may



be seen, for example, from Mr McLennan's work on 'Primitive



Marriage,' that a large part of mankind still simulate in their



marriage ceremonies the carrying off the bride by violence, and



thus preserve the memory of the reign of force which, at all



events as between tribe and tribe, preceded everywhere the reign



of law. It is not at the same time to be supposed that these



long-descended dramas imply or ever implied any disrespect for



the institutions with which they are associated. In all



probability they intentionally commemorate not the evil but the



remedy for the evil: and, until they degenerate into meaningless



usages, they are enacted, not in honour of brute force, but in



honour of the institutions which superseded it, Marriage and



Civil Justice.



    Almost every gesture and almost every set of formal words in



the Legis Actio Sacramenti symbolise something which, in some



part of the world or another, in some Aryan society or another,



has developed into an important institution. The claimant places



his hand on the slave or other subject of dispute, and this grasp



of the thing claimed, which is reproduced in the corresponding



procedure of the ancient Germans and which, from them, was



continued in various modified forms far down into the Middle



Ages, is an early example of that demand before action on which



all civilised systems of law insist. The wand, which the claimant



held in his hand, is stated by Gaius to have represented a spear,



and the spear, the emblem of the strong man armed, served as the



symbol of property held absolutely and against the world, not



only in the Roman but in several other Western societies. The



proceedings included a series of assertions and reassertions of



right by the parties, and this formal dialogue was the parent of



the Art of Pleading. The quarrel between plaintiff and defendant,



which was a mere pretence among the Romans, long remained a



reality in other societies, and, though its theory was altered,



it survived in the Wager of Battle which, as an English



institution, was only finally abolished in our fathers' day. The



interposition of the Praetor and the acceptance of his mediation



expanded into the Administration of Justice in the Roman State,



one of the most powerful of instrumentalities in the historical



transformation of the civilised world. The disputants staked a



sum of money -- the Sacramentum, from which the proceedings took



their name -- on the merits of their quarrel, and the stake went



into the public exchequer. The money thus wagered, which appears



in a singularly large number of archaic legal systems, is the



earliest representative of those Court-fees which have been a



more considerable power in legal history than historians of law



are altogether inclined to admit. The very spirit in which a



Legis Actio was conducted was that which, in the eyes of laymen,



has been most characteristic of lawyers in all historical times.



If, Says Gaius. you sued by Legis Actio for injury to your vines,



and called them vines, you would fail; you must call them trees,



because the text of the Twelve Tables spoke only of trees. The



ancient collection of Teutonic legal formulas, known as the



Malberg Gloss, contains provisions of precisely the same



character. If you sue for a bull, you will miscarry if you



describe him as a bull; you must give him his ancient juridical



designation of 'leader of the herd.' You must call the forefinger



the 'arrow'-finger, the goat the 'browser upon leeks.' There are



lawyers alive who can recollect when the English system of



Special Pleading, now just expiring, was applied upon principles



not remotely akin to these and historically descended from them.



    The description given by Gaius of the Legis Actio Sacramenti



is followed by a lacuna in the manuscript. It was once occupied



with an account of the Judicis Postulatio, which was evidently a



modification of the older Sacramental Action by which this



ancient remedy was adapted to a particular class of cases. The



text of the treatise begins again with a description of the



Condictio, which is said by Gaius to have been created, but which



is believed to have been only regulated, by two Roman statutes of



the sixth century of Rome -- the Lex Silia and the Lex Calpurnia.



The Condictio, which afterwards developed into one of the most



useful of the Roman actions, originally derived its name from a



notice which the plaintiff gave the defendant to appear before



the Praetor in thirty days, in order that a Judex or referee



might be nominated; and immediately (as I myself think) on this



notice being given, the parties entered into a 'sponsio' and



'restipulatio,' that is, they laid a formal wager (distinct from



the stake called Sacramentum) on the justice of their respective



contentions. The sum thus staked, which was always equal to a



third of the amount in dispute, went in the end to the successful



litigant, and not, like the Sacramentum, to the State. Lawyers



wondered, Gaius tells us, that such an action should be needed



when property could have been recovered by the older and



unmodified procedure. Many technical answers to this question



have been given by modern commentators on Roman law, but we will



see whether a better explanation of it cannot be obtained by



approaching it from another side.



    Gaius, leaving the Condictio, proceeds to discuss two of the



Legis Actiones, the Manus Injectio and the Pignoris Capio, which



cannot be made to square in any way with our modern conception of



an action. The Manus Injectio is expressly stated to have been



originally the Roman mode of execution against the person of a



judgment debtor. It has considerable historical interest, for it



was undoubtedly the instrument of the cruelties practised by the



Roman aristocracy on their defaulting plebeian debtors, and thus



it gave the first impetus to a series of popular movements which



affected the whole history of the Roman Commonwealth. The



Pignoris Capio also, possibly under a slightly altered name, was



a mode of execution in later times against property after decree;



but this was not its original purpose as a Legis Actio. It was at



first a wholly extra-judicial proceeding. The person who



proceeded by it seized in certain cases the goods of a



fellow-citizen, against whom he had a claim, but against whom he



had not instituted a suit. The power of seizure could be



exercised by soldiers against public officers bound to supply



them with pay, horse, or forage; and it could also be resorted to



by the seller of a beast for sacrifice against a defaulting



purchaser.. It was thus confined to claims of great urgency or of



highly sacred obligation; but it was afterwards extended to



demands for overdue arrears of public revenue. I am indebted to



Mr Poste for the observation that the ideal institutions of



Plato's Laws include something strongly resembling the Roman



Pignoris Capio; and here again it is a remedy for breach of



public duties connected with military service or religious



observance.



    I take the Pignoris Capio as the immediate starting-point of



all which I am about to say on the subject of Ancient Civil



Procedure. First of all let us ask whether Gaius himself gives us



any hint of its meaning and significance in the primitive Roman



system. The clue is slender, but it seems to me sufficiently



traceable in the statement that the Pignoris Capio could be



resorted to in the absence of the Praetor and generally in that



of the person under liability, and also that it might be carried



out even when the Courts were not sitting.



    Let us go back for a moment to the parent Legis Actio -- the



L. A. Sacramenti. Its venerable forms presuppose a quarrel and



celebrate the mode of settling it. It is a passing arbitrator



whose interposition is simulated by the Praetor. But suppose



there is no arbitrator at hand. What expedient for averting.



bloodshed remains, and is any such expedient reflected in that



ancient procedure which, by the fact of its existence, implies



that the shedding of blood has somehow been prevented?



    I dare say I shall at the outset appear to be making a



trivial remark when I say that one method of gaining the object



is to lay a wager. Even now this is one of the commonest ways of



postponing a dispute as to a matter of fact, and the truth is



that the tendency to bet upon results lies extremely deep in



human nature, and has grown up with it from its remote infancy.



It is not everybody who, when his blood is hot, will submit to



have a quarrel referred to a third person present, much less to a



third person absent; but he will constantly do so, if he lays a



wager on it, and if, besides being found in the right, he has a



chance of receiving the amount staked. And this I suppose --



differing, I own, from several high authorities -- to be the true



significance of the Sponsio and Restipulatio, which we know to



have been of the essence of the ancient Roman Condictio, and of



the agreement to appear before the Praetor in thirty days. The



Legis Actio Sacramenti assumes that the quarrel is at once



referred to a present arbitrator; the Condictio that the



reference is to the decision of an arbitrator after thirty days'



interval, but meantime the parties have entered into a separate



wager on the merits of their dispute. We know that the liability



to an independent penalty attached to the suitor by Condictio



even when it had become one of the most important Roman actions,



and that it was still exacted in the age of Cicero.



    There is yet another primitive contrivance by which, in the



absence of a present arbitrator, a quarrel may be prevented from



issuing in bloodshed. The claimant willing to go to arbitration



may, in the absence of his adversary, or if he be the stronger,



in his presence, take forcible possession of his moveable



property and detain it till he too submits. I believe this to



have been the true primitive office of the Pignoris Capio, though



the full evidence of my opinion will not be before you till I



have tracked the same institution through the twilight of other



legal systems. Among the Romans, even at the date of the Twelve



Tables, it had become (to employ Mr Tylor's phrase) a mere



survival, confined to cases when the denial of justice was



condemned by superstition or by a sense of the sternest public



emergency; and this was a consequence of the exceptionally rapid



development of Roman law and procedure, and of the exceptionally



early date at which the Roman tribunals became the organs of the



national sovereignty. You will see hereafter how much reason



there is for thinking that the progress of most societies towards



a complete administration of justice was slow and gradual, and



that the Commonwealth at first interfered through its various



organs rather to keep order and see fair play in quarrels than



took them, as it now does always and everywhere, into its own



hands. To this period, long forgotten among the Romans, those



peculiar rules pointed back which survived along with the



Pignoris Capio, and which provided for its exercise out of court



and during the judicial vacation.



    I turn to the Teutonic societies for vestiges of a practice



similar to that which the Romans called Pignoris Capio. They seem



to be quite unmistakeable in that portion of our own English law



which is concerned with the power of Distraint or Distress and



with the connected legal remedy known as Replevin. The examples



of the right to distrain another man's property which are most



familiar to you are, I dare say, the landlord's right to seize



the goods of his tenant for unpaid rent, and the right of the



lawful possessor of land to take and impound stray beasts which



are damaging his crops or soil. The process by which the latter



right is made effectual retains far more of the ancient



institution than does distress for rent. For the peculiar power



of the landlord to distrain for rent, while it remains an



extrajudicial remedy, has been converted into a complete remedy



of its kind by a series of statutes comparatively modern. It has



always, however, been the theory of the most learned English



lawyers that distress is in principle an incomplete remedy; its



primary object is to compel the person against whom it is



properly employed to make satisfaction. But goods distrained for



rent are nowadays not merely held as a security for the



landlord's claim; they are ultimately put up for sale with



certain prescribed formalities, the landlord is paid out of the



proceeds, and the overplus is returned to the tenant. Thus the



proceeding has become merely a special method by which payment of



rent, and certain other payments which are placed on the same



footing, are enforced without the help of a Court of Justice. But



the distraint of cattle for damage still retains a variety of



archaic features. It is not a complete remedy. The taker merely



keeps the cattle until satisfaction is made to him for the



injury, or till they are returned by him on an engagement to



contest the right to distrain in an action of Replevin.



    The practice of Distress -- of taking nams, a word preserved



in the once famous law-term withernam -- is attested by records



considerably older than the Conquest. There is reason to believe



that anciently it was resorted to in many more cases than our



oldest common-law authorities recognise; but about the reign of



Henry the Third, when it was confined to certain specific claims



and wrongs, the course of the proceeding was as follows: The



person assuming himself to be aggrieved seized the goods (which



anciently were almost always the cattle) of the person whom he



believed to have injured him or failed in duty towards him. He



drove the beasts to a pound, an enclosed piece of land reserved



for the purpose, and generally open to the sky. Let me observe in



passing that there is no more ancient institution in the country



than the Village-Pound. It is far older than the King's Bench,



and probably older than the Kingdom. While the cattle were on



their way to the pound the owner had a limited right of rescue



which the law recognised, but which he ran great risk in



exercising. Once lodged within the enclosure, the impounded



beasts, when the pound was uncovered, had to be fed by the owner



and not by the distrainor; nor was the rule altered till the



present reign. The distrainor's part in the proceedings ended in



fact with the impounding; and we have to consider what courses



were thereupon open to the person whose cattle had been seized.



Of course he might submit and discharge the demand. Or he might



tender security for its acquittal. Or again he might remain



obstinate and leave his beasts in the pound. It might happen,



however, that he altogether denied the distrainor's right to



distrain, or that the latter, on security being tendered to him



for the adjustment of his claim, refused to release the cattle.



In either of these casts the cattle-owner (at least at the time



of which we are speaking) might either apply to the King's



Chancery for a writ commanding the Sheriff to 'make replevin,' or



he might verbally complain himself to the Sheriff, who would then



proceed at once to 'replevy.' The process denoted by this ancient



phrase consisted of several stages. The Sheriff first of all



demanded a view of the impounded cattle; if this were refused, he



treated the distrainor as having committed a violent breach of



the King's peace, and raised the hue and cry after him. If the



cattle (as doubtless constantly was the case) had been driven to



a distance and out of his jurisdiction, the Sheriff sought for



cattle of the distrainor and seized them to double the value of



the beasts which were not forthcoming -- the 'taking in



withernam' of old English law. In more peaceable times, however,



and among law-abiding people, the deputy of the Crown was allowed



to see the cattle, which he immediately returned to their



original owner on a pledge to abide by the decision of a Court of



Justice. A day was then appointed for the trial, which took place



with the proceeding well known to lawyers as the Action of



Replevin. A great deal of technical learning has clustered round



it, but for our purposes it is enough to say that the plaintiff



in the action was the owner of the distrained cattle and the



defendant was the distrainor.



    The comparative antiquity of the various steps in the



procedure are not, I think, difficult to detect. Nothing can be



more archaic than the picture presented by its more venerable



details. The seizure of the cattle, the rescue and the



counter-seizure, belong to the oldest practices of mankind. We



were carried back, by the Legis Actio Sacramenti of the Romans,



to a sudden fight over disputed property barely stopped by a



casual passer-by. Here, not in a city-community, but among the



ancient legal forms of a half-pastoral, half-agricultural people,



we come upon plain traces of a foray. But the foray which



survives in the old Law of Distress is not, like the combat of



the ancient Roman Action,a mere dramatic representation. Up to a



certain point it is a reality, and the most probable account of



its origin is that it is a genuinely disorderly proceeding which



the law steps in to regulate. You will see presently that there



are other independent reasons for thinking that some of the



earliest interferences of the power which we call the Law, the



State, or the King, with high-handed violence consisted, neither



in wholly forbidding it nor in assuming active jurisdiction over



the quarrel which provoked it, but in limiting it, prescribing



forms for it, or turning it to new purposes. Thus the next series



of incidents in the practice of distraint -- the impounding, the



stress laid upon pledge or security, and the acknowledgment of



continuing ownership which is implied in the liability of the



person distrained upon to feed the cattle, and in the rule that



the distrainor shall not work them -- belong to a newer range of



ideas which dictate the first attempts to moderate reprisals and



regulate revenge for wrong. Distress now becomes a semi-orderly



contrivance for extorting satisfaction. Many vestiges of this



ancient function remain. It has been observed by Blackstone and



others that the modified exemption of certain classes of goods



from distraint -- plough-oxen, for example, and tools of trade --



was not in its origin the least intended as a kindness to the



owner. It was entailed by the very nature of the whole



proceeding, since without the instruments of tillage or



handicraft the debtor could never pay his debt. A passage in the



'Dialogus de Scaccario' (ii. 14), prescribing the order in which



the goods of the King's debtors are to be sold, strongly bears



out this view.



    Latest in the order of proceeding, and latest probably in



date, came the direct interposition of the State. The King steps



in, first. in what we should now call his administrative



capacity. His administrative deputy, the Sheriff, on complaint



made by their owner, Follows up the cattle, demands a sight of



them, raises the hue and cry if it be refused, and seizes twice



their number if the beasts have been driven away. Even when he



obtains his view, he can do nothing unless the cattle-owner,



denying the right of his adversary to distrain, is prepared with



security that he will try the question between them in a Court of



Justice. Thus tardily does that power make its appearance which



according to our notions should long since have appeared on the



scene, the judicial power of the Commonwealth. Its jurisdiction



is obviously acquired through the act of the Sheriff in restoring



the cattle upon pledge given. The distrainor has lost his



material security, the cattle. The owner of the cattle has become



personally, bound. And thus both are placed under a compulsion



which drives them in the end to a judicial arbitration.



    Nearly six hundred years ago, the contrast between the



ancient proceedings in Replevin and suits conducted on what were



then modern principles was already striking. The second chapter



of the Statute of Westminster the Second is aimed at certain



contrivances by which tenants contrived to defeat the lord's



remedy by distress; and, in giving the King's Justices



jurisdiction in such cases, it goes on to say that such a



provision does not militate against the principle of the Common



Law which forbids the removal of suits to the Justices on the



petition of a defendant. 'For,' it adds, 'although at first sight



the tenant may seem to be plaintiff and the lord defendant, yet



in reality, regard being had to the fact that the lord distrains



and sues for services and dues behind, he is rather plaintiff or



complainant than defendant.' The action of Replevin is in fact an



excellent illustration of the difference between ancient and



modern juridical principles. According to ideas now confirmed in



us, the person who sets a Court of Justice in motion is the



person who complains of a wrong. In the case supposed, this is



not the man distrained upon but the man who distrains. He it is



who has suffered an injury for which he made reprisals on his



adversary's property. Yet it is his adversary who has to start



the legal procedure and to constitute himself plaintiff in the



Action of Replevin. The reason why a modern Court of Justice



would insist on taking the whole dispute into its own hands, and



dealing with it in its own way from the very beginning, is that,



having always the full command of the public force, it is sure of



being able to compel the submission of the defendant to its



jurisdiction and of coercing him in the end till he does justice,



however long the coercion may be delayed. But at the era to which



the procedure in distress originally belonged, the Court had no



such assurance of power; and hence the person assumed to have a



grievance is allowed to proceed according to the primitive



method, which has the advantage of giving the other side the



strongest inducements to call in the judicial authority of the



State and submit to its decision.



    The information furnished to us respecting this primitive



procedure by the various bodies of Continental Teutonic law known



collectively as the Leges Barbarorum is of a very interesting



kind. Almost all of them contain references to Pignoratio or



distraint of goods. The Visigothic law expressly prohibits it;



and, at the other end of the scale, the Lombardic law has a trace



of that licence of distress which has survived in the English



Common-law and permits it after simple demand of payment. But the



Salic law, which the most learned Germans now believe to have



been drawn up at some period between the time at which Tacitus



wrote and the time at which the Franks broke into the Empire,



contains a series of very peculiar and instructive provisions on



the subject, which have been for the first time fully interpreted



by Sohm. Under this system, Distress is not yet a judicial



remedy; it is still an extrajudicial mode of redress, but it has



been incorporated with a regular and highly complex procedure. A



succession of notices have to be given in solemn form by the



complainant to the person of whom he complains, and whose



property he proposes to seize. Nor can he proceed to seizure



until he has summoned this person before the Popular Court, and



until the Popular Officer of the Court, the Thunginus, has



pronounced a formula licensing distraint. Then,and not till then,



he can make what we should call a distress upon his adversary. It



seems quite clear that, before the Conquest, attempts were made



in England to narrow the liberty of distraint by the same class



of restrictions which we find in the Salic Law and the allied



Teutonic bodies of usage. These provisions have their close



counterpart in the ordinance of Canute that no man is to take



nams unless he has demanded right three times in the Hundred; if



he obtain no justice the third time, he is to go to the



Shire-gemot; the shire is to appoint him a fourth time, and, if



that fails, he may take the distress.



    It is to be remarked that the process of the Salic Law which



answers to our distress is especially a remedy in certain cases



of breach of contract. Distraint, the seizing of nams, was



certainly employed to enforce a similar class of demands under



old English law before the Conquest; and the practice seems to



have been known in Bracton's day, though the brevity of his



notice does not permit us to understand fully its course and



character. In this respect the Pignoration of the Continental



Teutonic law is more archaic than the distress with which we are



familiar in England, since the fragment of the system which has



survived in our Common law (and it is to this that it probably



owes its survival) was from the first pre-eminently a remedy by



which the lord compelled his tenants to render him their



services. But on the other hand it is interesting to observe that



our English distress is in some particulars of a more archaic



character than the corresponding compulsory process of the Leges



Barbarorum. Thus notice of the intention to distrain was never in



England essential to the legality of distress (Trent v. Hunt, 9



Exch. Rep. 20), although statute-law renders it necessary to make



a sale of the distrained property legal; and again, in the oldest



ascertainable state of our Common-law, though distraint sometimes



followed a proceeding in the lord's Court, yet it did not



necessarily presuppose or require it.



    It should be understood that the Frankish procedure was



completely at the disposal of the complainant. It is not a



strictly judicial procedure, but rather a procedure regulating



extrajudicial redress. If the complainant observes the proper



forms, the part of the Court in licensing seizure is purely



passive. Even after the exhaustive examination which this part of



the Salic Law has undergone from Professor Sohm, it is very



difficult to say whether at any point of the procedure the



defendant had the opportunity of putting in a substantial



defence; but it seems certain that, whenever he could do this, he



appeared virtually as a plaintiff like the distrainee in our



Action of Replevin, and there is no doubt that, if he submitted



or was unsuccessful in attacking the proceedings of the other



side, he paid not only the original debt but various additional



penalties entailed by neglect to comply with previous notices to



discharge it. Such a procedure seems to us founded on the now



monstrous assumption that plaintiffs are always in the right and



defendants always in the wrong. Yet the assumption would not



perhaps have struck the earliest authors of legal improvement as



altogether monstrous, nor could they have quite comprehended the



modern principle which compels the complainant to establish at



all events a prim* facie case. With them, the man most likely to



be in the right would appear to be the man who faced the manifold



risks attending the effort to obtain redress, the man who



complained to the Popular Assembly, the man who cried for justice



to the King sitting in the gate. It is only when violent wrong



has ceased to be rife, when the dangers of contesting the



oppressions of powerful men have become insignificant, when the



law has been long and regularly administered according to



technical procedure, that unjust claims are seen to be hardly



less common than unjust refusals to satisfy them. In one



particular case, the complaint of the King, the old assumption



that complainants are presumably in the right was kept long alive



among us, and had much to do with the obstinate dislike of



lawyers to allowing prisoners to be defended by Counsel.



    Gaius speaking of the Legis Actiones generally, observes that



'they fell into discredit, because through the excessive subtlety



of the ancient lawyers, things came to such a pass that he who



committed the smallest error failed altogether.'



    Blackstone, many centuries afterwards, has the following



remark on the English Law of Distress: 'The many particulars



which attend the taking of a distress used formerly to make it a



hazardous kind of proceeding; for, if any one irregularity was



committed, it vitiated the whole.'



    I quote these passages, not only on account of the curious



similarity of language between two writers of whom the later



could not possibly have read the earlier, but because the



excessive technicality of ancient law which they both notice goes



some way to explain the severity and one-sidedness of the old



Teutonic procedure. The power of seizing a man's property



extra-judicially in satisfaction of your demand was, as Professor



Sohm justly remarks, a sort of two-edged sword. You might bring



your adversary to the ground by it, but you were extremely likely



to injure yourself. For, unless the complainant who sought to



distrain went through all the acts and words required by the law



with the most rigorous accuracy, he in his turn, besides failing



in his object, incurred a variety of penalties, which could be



just as harshly exacted as his own original demand. The



difficulty of putting the procedure into operation thus at once



made disputants cautious in resorting to it, and seemed to men in



general to compensate for its inherent inequitableness. This



consideration, however, though it explains in part how the harsh



ancient law reconciled itself to the sense of right, is not by



itself sufficient to account for the form which it assumed in the



Teutonic Codes, or for the vitality of a portion of it amid our



own institutions.



    I cannot doubt that the practice which I have called by the



general name of Distress kept its place in ancient Teutonic law



partly as a mere 'survival.' I have already insisted that one



great characteristic of the primitive ages was the fewness of



human ideas. Societies, just emerging from the savage state, had



been used to associate redress of wrong with the seizure of a



wrong-doer's goods, and they were unable mentally quite to



disconnect the two even when they began to regulate the practice.



They did not, therefore, supersede distress by a wholly new



system, but engrafted it on a later procedure, which occasionally



took the form so curiously preserved in its main features to our



own day by the English Common law, but which at a relatively



later date and more generally may be believed to have shaped



itself on the model of the rules observed by the Salian Franks.



    It is not possible to explain all survivals by some



convenience which they incidentally serve. Some have undoubtedly



been continued by superstition, some by mere habit. But those



relics of ancient thought and conduct which have been kept alive



longest have generally had an usefulness of their own. Here the



private redress of wrong, taken into the legal procedure, served



to compel the appearance of the defendant and his submission to



jurisdiction at a time when judicial authority was yet in its



infancy, and when Courts of Justice could not as yet completely



and regularly command the aid of sovereign power. Gradually, as



the public force, the arm of the State, was more and more placed



at the disposal of tribunals, they were able more and more to



dispense with extrajudicial assistance. In the state of Teutonic



law represented by the Frankish Code, we find a specific class of



cases tried throughout judicially (in our modern sense of the



word) from the initial stage to the judgment; but the judgment is



not by its own force operative. If the defendant has expressly



promised to obey it, the Count or royal deputy, on being properly



summoned, will execute it; but if no such promise has been made,



the plaintiff has no remedy except an application to the King in



person. No long time, however, after the Franks have been settled



within the Empire, we find that mother step has been taken



towards the administration of justice on modern principles, and



now the royal deputy will execute the judgment even though there



has been no promise to submit to it. At this point Distress is



wholly taken out of the hands of private litigants and



extrajudicial seizure becomes judicial seizure. The change is



obviously a result of the growing vigour of Courts, greatly due



in our own country to the development of royal justice at the



expense of popular justice. Still English judicial proceedings



long savoured of the old practices. Every student of our ancient



English forms of proceeding will recollect on what small apparent



provocation the King constantly took the lands of the defendant



into his hands or seized his goods, simply to compel or perfect



his submission to the royal jurisdiction. It seems probable that



Distress was gradually lost in and absorbed by Attachment and



Distringas. The theory of Attachment now is that it is the taking



of property into the actual or constructive possession of the



judicial power, and the later course of change under which it has



faded into an occasional and exceptional proceeding, requiring to



be justified by special reasons, corresponds with the growing



confidence of Courts of Justice in their possession of



irresistible power confided to them by the sovereign. As regards



that fragment of the primitive institution which remains in our



law, I imagine that Distress would at most have become a mere



survival, confined perhaps to the impounding of stray cattle, if



several statutory innovations had not turned it into a convenient



extra-judicial remedy for landlords, by giving the distrainor a



power of sale which in old English law was limited to a few very



special demands. The modern theory of Distress is that a landlord



is allowed to distrain because by the nature of the case he is



always compelled to give his tenant credit, and that he can



distrain without notice because every man is supposed to know



when his rent is due. But this theory, though it explains the



continuance of Distress to our day, does not at all fit in with



the most ancient ideas on the subject, and could not indeed be



easily made to square with the practice of distraint even at a



date so comparatively late as that at which Bracton wrote. How



accidental is the association of Distress with the powers of



landlords may be seen from the fact that, though there are



plentiful traces of the institution in the ancient Scottish law,



the same practical results which the English system produces by



allowing landlords to distrain for rent are chiefly attained in



Scotland by applying to landlord and tenant the Romanised Law of



Hypothek.



    The comparison of the various Teutonic bodies of law suggests



then to my mind as regards those systems, the following



conclusions respecting the historical development of the remedies



which grew out of the savage practice of violently seizing



property in redress for supposed wrong. Two alternative



expedients were adopted by nascent law. One of these consisted in



tolerating distraint up to a certain point; it was connived at so



far as it served to compel the submission of defendants to the



jurisdiction of Courts, but in all other cases it was treated as



wilful breach of the peace. The other was the incorporation of



distraint with a regular procedure. The complainant must observe



a great number of forms at his peril; but if he observes them he



can distrain in the end. In a still more advanced condition of



legal ideas, the tribunals take the seizure of land or goods into



their own hands, using it freely to coerce defendants into



submission. Finally, Courts of Justice resort to coercion before



judgment only on the rarest occasions, sure as they at last are



of the effectiveness of their process, and of the power which



they hold in deposit from the Sovereign Commonwealth.












