



 Part Second
 
 Of the History of Rude Nations
 
 Section I
 
 Of the Informations on this subject which are derived from
 Antiquity
 
     The history of mankind is confined within a limited period,
 and from every quarter brings an intimation that human affairs
 have had a beginning: Nations, distinguished by the possession of
 arts, and the felicity of their political establishments, have
 been derived from a feeble original, and still preserve in their
 story the indications of a slow and gradual progress, by which
 this distinction was gained. The antiquities of every people,
 however diversified, and however disguised, contain the same
 information on this point.
     In sacred history, we find the parents of the species, as yet
 a single pair, sent forth to inherit the earth, and to force a
 subsistence for themselves amidst the briers and thorns which
 were made to abound on its surface. Their race, which was again
 reduced to a few, had to struggle with the dangers that await a
 weak and infant species; and after many ages elapsed, the most
 respectable nations took their rise from one or a few families
 that had pastured their flocks in the desert.
     The Grecians derive their own origin from unsettled tribes,
 whose frequent migrations are a proof of the rude and infant
 state of their communities; and whose warlike exploits, so much
 celebrated in story, only exhibit the struggles with which they
 disputed for the possession of a country they afterwards, by
 their talent for fable, by their arts, and their policy, rendered
 so famous in the history of mankind.
     Italy must have been divided into many rude and feeble
 cantons, when a band of robbers, as we are taught to consider
 them, found a secure settlement on the banks of the Tiber, and
 when a people, yet composed only of one sex, sustained the
 character of a nation. Rome, for many ages, saw, from her walls,
 on every side, the territory of her enemies, and found as little
 to check or to stifle the weakness of her infant power, as she
 did afterwards to restrain the progress of her extended empire.
 Like a Tartar or a Scythian horde, which had pitched on a
 settlement, this nascent community was equal, if not superior, to
 every tribe in its neighbourhood; and the oak which has covered
 the field with its shade, was once a feeble plant in the nursery,
 and not to be distinguished from the weeds by which its early
 growth was restrained.
     The Gauls and the Germans are come to our knowledge with the
 marks of a similar condition; and the inhabitants of Britain, at
 the time of the first Roman invasions, resembled, in many things,
 the present natives of North America: they were ignorant of
 agriculture; they painted their bodies; and used for cloathing,
 the skins of beasts.
     Such therefore appears to have been the commencement of
 history with all nations, and in such circumstances are we to
 look for the original character of mankind. The inquiry refers to
 a distant period, and every conclusion should build on the facts
 which are preserved for our use. Our method, notwithstanding, too
 frequently, is to rest the whole on conjecture; to impute every
 advantage of our nature to those arts which we ourselves possess;
 and to imagine, that a mere negation of all our virtues is a
 sufficient description of man in his original state. We are
 ourselves the supposed standards of politeness and civilization;
 and where our own features do not appear, we apprehend, that
 there is nothing which deserves to be known. But it is probable
 that here, as in many other cases, we are ill qualified, from our
 supposed knowledge of causes, to prognosticate effects, or to
 determine what must have been the properties and operations, even
 of our own nature, in the absence of those circumstances in which
 we have seen it engaged. Who would, from mere conjecture,
 suppose, that the naked savage would be a coxcomb and a gamester?
 that he would be proud and vain, without the distinctions of
 title and fortune? and that his principal care would be to adorn
 his person, and to find an amusement? Even if it could be
 supplied that he would thus share in our vices, and, in the midst
 of his forest, vie with the follies which are practised in the
 town; yet no one would be so bold as to affirm, that he would
 likewise, in any instance, excel us in talents and virtues; that
 he would have a penetration, a force of imagination and
 elocution, an ardour of mind, an affection and courage, which the
 arts, the discipline, and the policy of few nations would be able
 to improve. Yet these particulars are a part in the description
 which is delivered by those who have had opportunities of seeing
 mankind in their rudest condition: and beyond the reach of such
 testimony, we can neither safely take, nor pretend to give,
 information on the subject.
     If conjectures and opinions formed at a distance, have not
 sufficient authority in the history of mankind, the domestic
 antiquities of every nation must, for this very reason, be
 received with caution. They are, for most part, the mere
 conjectures or the fictions of subsequent ages; and even where at
 first they contained some resemblance of truth, they still vary
 with the imagination of those by whom they are transmitted, and
 in every generation receive a different form. They are made to
 bear the stamp of the times through which they have passed in the
 form of tradition, not of the ages to which their pretended
 descriptions relate. The information they bring, is not like the
 light reflected from a mirrour, which delineates the object from
 which it originally came; but, like rays that come broken and
 dispersed from an opaque or unpolished surface, only give the
 colours and features of the body from which they were last
 reflected.
     When traditionary fables are rehearsed by the vulgar, they
 bear the marks of a national character; and though mixed with
 absurdities, often raise the imagination, and move the heart:
 when made the materials of poetry, and adorned by the skill and
 the eloquence of an ardent and superior mind, they instruct the
 understanding, as well as engage the passions. It is only in the
 management of mere antiquaries, or stript of the ornaments which
 the laws of history forbid them to wear, that they become even
 unfit to amuse the fancy, or to serve any purpose whatever. It
 were absurd to quote the fable of the Iliad Or the Odyssey, the
 legends of Hercules, Theseus, or Oedipus, as authorities in
 matter of fact relating to the history of mankind; but they may,
 with great justice, be cited to ascertain what were the
 conceptions and sentiments of the age in which they were
 composed, or to characterise the genius of that people, with
 whose imaginations they were blended, and by whom they were
 fondly rehearsed and admired.
     In this manner fiction may be admitted to vouch for the
 genius of nations, while history has nothing to offer that is
 intitled to credit. The Greek fable accordingly conveying a
 character of its authors, throws light on an age of which no
 other record remains. The superiority of this people is indeed in
 no circumstance more evident than in the strain of their
 fictions, and in the story of those fabulous heroes, poets, and
 sages, whose tales, being invented or embellished by an
 imagination already filled with the subject for which the hero
 was celebrated, served to inflame that ardent enthusiasm with
 which this people afterwards proceeded in the pursuit of every
 national object.
     It was no doubt of great advantage to those nations, that
 their system of fable was original, and being already received in
 popular traditions, served to diffuse those improvements of
 reason, imagination, and sentiment, which were afterwards, by men
 of the finest talents, made on the fable itself, or conveyed in
 its moral. The passions of the poet pervaded the minds of the
 people, and the conceptions of men of genius being communicated
 to the vulgar, became the incentives of a national spirit.
     A mythology borrowed from abroad, a literature founded on
 references to a strange country, and fraught with foreign
 allusions, are much more confined in their use: they speak to the
 learned alone; and though intended to inform the understanding,
 and to mend the heart, may, by being confined to a few, have an
 opposite effect: they may foster conceit on the ruins of common
 sense, and render what was, at least innocently, sung by the
 Athenian mariner at his oar, or rehearsed by the shepherd in
 attending his flock, an occasion of vice, and the foundation of
 pedantry and scholastic pride.
     Our very learning, perhaps, where its influence extends,
 serves, in some measure, to depress our national spirit. Our
 literature being derived from nations of a different race, who
 flourished at a time when our ancestors were in a state of
 barbarity, and consequently when they were despised by those who
 had attained to the literary arts, has given rise to a humbling
 opinion, that we ourselves are the offspring of mean and
 Contemptible nations, with whom the human imagination and
 sentiment had no effect, till the genius was in a manner inspired
 by examples, and directed by lessons that were brought from
 abroad. The Romans, from whom our accounts are chiefly derived,
 have admitted, in the rudeness of their own ancestors, a system
 of virtues, which all simple nations perhaps equally possess; a
 contempt of riches, love of their country, patience of hardship,
 danger, and fatigue. They have, notwithstanding, vilified our
 ancestors for having perhaps only resembled their own; at least,
 in the defect of their arts, and in the neglect of conveniencies
 which those arts are employed to procure.
     It is from the Greek and the Roman historians, however, that
 we have not only the most authentic and instructive, but even the
 most engaging, representations of the tribes from whom we
 descend. Those sublime and intelligent writers understood human
 nature, and could collect its features, and exhibit its
 characters in every situation. They were ill succeeded in this
 task by the early historians of modern Europe; who, generally
 bred to the profession of monks, and confined to the monastic
 life, applied themselves to record what they were pleased to
 denominate facts, while they suffered the productions of genius
 to perish, and were unable, either by the matter they selected,
 or the style of their compositions, to give any representation of
 the active spirit of mankind in any condition. With them, a
 narration was supposed to constitute history, whilst it did not
 convey any knowledge of men; and history itself was allowed to be
 complete, while, amidst the events and the succession of princes
 that are recorded in the order of time, we are left to look in
 vain for those characteristic of the understanding and the heart,
 which alone, in every human transaction, render the story either
 engaging or useful.
     We therefore willingly quit the history of our early
 ancestors, where Caesar and Tacitus have dropped them; and
 perhaps, till we come within the reach of what is connected with
 present affairs, and makes a part in the system on which we now
 proceed, have little reason to expect any subject to interest or
 inform the mind. We have no reason, however, from hence to
 conclude, that the matter itself was more barren, or the scene of
 human affairs less interesting, in modern Europe, than it has
 been on every stage where mankind were engaged to exhibit the
 movements of the heart, the efforts of generosity, magnanimity,
 and courage.
     The trial of what those ages contained, is not even fairly
 made, when men of genius and distinguished abilities, with the
 accomplishments of a learned and a polished age, collect the
 materials they have found, and, with the greatest success,
 connect the story of illiterate ages with transactions of a later
 date: it is difficult even for them, under the names which are
 applied in a new state of society, to convey a just apprehension
 of what mankind were in situations so different, and in times so
 remote from their own.
     In deriving from historians of this character the instruction
 which their writings are fit to bestow, we are frequently to
 forget the general terms that are employed, in order to collect
 the real manners of an age, from the minute circumstances that
 are occasionally presented. The titles of Royal and Noble were
 applicable to the families of Tarquin, Collatinus, and
 Cincinnatus; but Lucretia was employed in domestic industry with
 her maids, and Cincinnatus followed the plough. The dignities,
 and even the offices, of civil society, were known many ages ago,
 in Europe, by their present appellations; but we find in the
 history of England, that a king and his court being assembled to
 solemnize a festival, an outlaw, who had subsisted by robbery,
 came to share in the feast. The king himself arose to force this
 unworthy guest from the company, a scuffle ensued between them,
 and the king was killed.(1*) A chancellor and prime minister,
 whose magnificence and sumptuous furniture were the subject of
 admiration and envy, had his apartments covered every day in
 winter with clean straw and hay, and in summer with green rushes
 or boughs. Even the sovereign himself, in those ages, was
 provided with forage for his bed.(2*) These picturesque features
 and characteristical strokes of the times, recal the imagination
 from the supposed distinction of monarch and subject, to that
 state of rough familiarity in which our ancestors lived, and
 under which they acted, with a view to objects, and on principles
 of conduct, which we seldom comprehend, when we are employed to
 record their transactions, or to study their characters.
     Thucydides, notwithstanding the prejudice of his country
 against the name of Barbarian, understood that it was in the
 customs of barbarous nations he was to study the more ancient
 manners of Greece.
     The Romans might have found an image of their own ancestors,
 in the representations they have given of ours: and if ever an
 Arab clan shall become a civilized nation, or any American tribe
 escape the poison which is administered by our traders of Europe,
 it may be from the relations of the present times, and the
 descriptions which are now given by travellers, that such a
 people, in after ages, may best collect the accounts of their
 origin. It is in their present condition, that we are to behold,
 as in a mirrour, the features of our own progenitors; and from
 thence we are to draw our conclusions with respect to the
 influence of situations, in which, we have reason to believe, our
 fathers were placed.
     What should distinguish a German or a Briton, in the habits
 of his mind or his body, in his manners or apprehensions, from an
 American, who, like him, with his bow and his dart, is left to
 traverse the forest; and in a like severe or variable climate, is
 obliged to subsist by the chace?
     If, in advanced years, we would form a just notion of our
 progress from the cradle, we must have reCourse to the nursery,
 and from the example of those who are still in the period of life
 we mean to describe, take our representation of past manners,
 that cannot, in any other way, be recalled.
 
 Section II
 
 Of Rude Nations prior to the Establishment of Property
 
     From one to the other extremity of America; from Kamschatka
 westward to the river Oby, and from the Northern sea, over that
 length of country, to the confines of China, of India, and
 Persia; from the Caspian to the Red sea, with little exception,
 and from thence over the inland continent and the western shores
 of Africa; we every where meet with nations on whom we bestow the
 appellations of barbarous or savage. That extensive tract of the
 earth, containing so great a variety of situation, climate, and
 soil, should, in the manners of its inhabitants, exhibit all the
 diversities which arise from the unequal influence of the sun,
 joined to a different nourishment and manner of life. Every
 question, however, on this subject is premature, till we have
 first endeavoured to form some general conception of our species
 in its rude state, and have learned to distinguish mere ignorance
 from dullness, and the want of arts from the want of capacity.
     Of the nations who dwell in those, or any other of the less
 cultivated parts of the earth, some intrust their subsistence
 chiefly to hunting, fishing, or the natural produce of the soil.
 They have little attention to property, and scarcely any
 beginnings of subordination or government. Others having
 possessed themselves of herds, and depending for their provision
 on pasture, know what it is to be poor and rich. They know the
 relations of patron and client, of servant and master, and suffer
 themselves to be classed according to their measures of wealth.
 This distinction must create a material difference of character,
 and may furnish two separate heads, under which to consider the
 history of mankind in their rudest state; that of the savage, who
 is not yet acquainted with property; and that of the barbarian,
 to whom it is, although not ascertained by laws, a principal
 object of care and desire.
     It must appear very evident, that property is a matter of
 progress. It requires, among other particulars which are the
 effects of time, some method of defining possession. The very
 desire of it proceeds from experience; and the industry by which
 it is gained, or improved, requires such a habit of acting with a
 view to distant objects, as may overcome the present disposition
 either to sloth or to enjoyment. This habit is slowly acquired,
 and is in reality a principal distinction of nations in the
 advanced state of mechanic and commercial arts.
     In a tribe which subsists by hunting and fishing, the arms,
 the utensils, and the fur, which the individual carries, are to
 him the only subjects of property. The food of to-morrow is yet
 wild in the forest, or hid in the lake; it cannot be appropriated
 before it is caught; and even then, being the purchase of
 numbers, who fish or hunt in a body, it accrues to the community,
 and is applied to immediate use, or becomes an accession to the
 stores of the public.
     Where savage nations, as in most parts of America, mix with
 the practice of hunting some species of rude agriculture, they
 still follow, with respect to the soil and the fruits of the
 earth, the analogy of their principal object. As the men hunt, so
 the women labour together; and, after they have shared the toils
 of the seed-time. they enjoy the fruits of the harvest in common.
 The field in which they have planted, like the district over
 which they are accustomed to hunt, is claimed as a property by
 the nation, but is not parcelled in lots to its members. They go
 forth in parties to prepare the ground, to plant, and to reap.
 The harvest is gathered into the public granary, and from thence,
 at stated times, is divided into shares for the maintenance of
 separate families.(3*) Even the returns of the market, when they
 trade with foreigners, are brought home to the stock of the
 nation.(4*)
     As the fur and the bow pertain to the individual, the cabbin
 and its utensils are appropriated to the family; and as the
 domestic cares are committed to the women, so the property of the
 household seems likewise to be vested in them. The children are
 considered as pertaining to the mother, with little regard to
 descent on the father's side. The males, before they are married,
 remain in the cabbin in which they are born; but after they have
 formed a new connection with the other sex, they change their
 habitation, and become an accession to the family in which they
 have found their wives. The hunter and the warrior are numbered
 by the matron as a part of her treasure; they are reserved for
 perils and trying occasions; and in the recess of public
 councils, in the intervals of hunting or war, are maintained by
 the cares of the women, and loiter about in mere amusement or
 sloth.(5*)
     While one sex continue to value themselves chiefly on their
 courage, their talent for policy, and their warlike achievements,
 this species of property which is bestowed on the other, is in
 reality a mark of subjection; not, as some writers alledge, of
 their having acquired an ascendant.'(6*) It is the care and
 trouble of a subject with which the warrior does not chuse to be
 embarrassed. It is a servitude, and a continual toil, where no
 honours are won; and they whose province it is, are in fact the
 slaves and the helots of their country If in this destination of
 the sexes; while the men continue to indulge themselves in the
 contempt of sordid and mercenary arts, the cruel establishment of
 slavery is for some ages deferred; if in this tender, though
 unequal alliance, the affections of the heart prevent the
 severities practised on slaves; we have in the custom itself, as
 perhaps in many other instances, reason to prefer the first
 suggestions of nature, to many of her after refinements.
     If mankind, in any instance, continue the article of property
 on the footing we have now represented, we may easily credit what
 is farther reported by travellers, that they admit of no
 distinctions of rank or condition; and that they have in fact no
 degree of subordination different from the distribution of
 function, which follows the differences of age, talents, and
 dispositions. Personal qualities give an ascendant in the midst
 of occasions which require their exertion; but in times of
 relaxation, leave no vestige of power or prerogative. A warrior
 who has led the youth of his nation to the slaughter of their
 enemies, or who has been foremost in the chace, returns upon a
 level with the rest of his tribe; and when the only business is
 to sleep, or to feed, can enjoy no pre-eminence; for he sleeps
 and he feeds no better than they.
     Where no profit attends dominion, one party is as much averse
 to the trouble of perpetual command, as the other is to the
 mortification of perpetual submission: 'I love victory, I love
 great actions,' says Montesquieu in the character of Sylla; 'but
 have no relish for the languid detail of pacific government, or
 the pageantry of high station.' He has touched perhaps what is a
 prevailing sentiment in the simplest state of society, when the
 weakness of motives suggested by interest, and the ignorance of
 any elevation not founded on merit, supplies the place of
 disdain. The character of the mind, however, in this state, is
 not founded on ignorance alone. Men are conscious of their
 equality, and are tenacious of its rights. Even when they follow
 a leader to the field, they cannot brook the pretensions to a
 formal command: they listen to no orders; and they come under no
 military engagements, but those of mutual fidelity, and equal
 ardour in the enterprise.(7*)
     This description, we may believe, is unequally applicable to
 different nations, who have made unequal advances in the
 establishment of property. Among the Caribbees, and the other
 natives of the warmer climates in America, the dignity of
 chieftain is hereditary, or elective, and continued for life: the
 unequal distribution of property creates a visible
 subordination.(8*) But among the Iroquois, and other nations of
 the temperate zone, the titles of magistrate and subject, of
 noble and mean, are as little known as those of rich and poor.
 The old men, without being invested with any coercive power,
 employ their natural authority in advising or in prompting the
 resolutions of their tribe: the military leader is pointed out by
 the superiority of his manhood and valour: the statesman is
 distinguished only by the attention with which his counsel is
 heard; the warrior by the confidence with which the youth of his
 nation follow him to the field: and if their concerts must be
 supposed to constitute a species of political government, it is
 one to which no language of ours can be applied. Power is no more
 than the natural ascendency of the mind; the discharge of office
 no more than a natural exercise of the personal character; and
 while the community acts with an appearance of order, there is no
 sense of disparity in the breast of any of its members.(9*)
     In these happy, though informal, proceedings, where age alone
 gives a place in the council; where youth, ardour, and valour in
 the field, give a title to the station of leader; where the whole
 community is assembled on any alarming occasion, we may venture
 to say, that we have found the origin of the senate, the
 executive power, and the assembly of the people; institutions for
 which ancient legislators have been so much renowned. The senate
 among the Greeks, as well as the Latins, appears, from the
 etymology of its name, to have been originally composed of
 elderly men. The military leader at Rome, in a manner not unlike
 to that of the American warrior, proclaimed his levies, and the
 citizen prepared for the field, in consequence of a voluntary
 engagement. The suggestions of nature, which directed the policy
 of nations in the wilds of America, were followed before on the
 banks of the Eurotas and the Tyber; and Lycurgus and Romulus
 found the model of their institutions where the members of every
 rude nation find the earliest mode of uniting their talents, and
 combining their forces.
     Among the North-American nations, every individual is
 independent; but he is engaged by his affections and his habits
 in the cares of a family. Families, like so many separate tribes,
 are subject to no inspection or government from abroad; whatever
 passes at home, even bloodshed and murder, are only supposed to
 concern themselves. They are, in the mean time, the parts of a
 canton; the women assemble to plant their maize; the old men go
 to council; the huntsman and the warrior joins the youth of his
 village in the field. Many such cantons assemble to constitute a
 national council, or to execute a national enterprise. When the
 Europeans made their first settlements in America, six such
 nations had formed a league, had their amphyctiones or
 states-general, and, by the firmness of their union, and the
 ability of their councils, had obtained an ascendant from the
 mouth of the St Laurence to that of the Mississippi.(10*) They
 appeared to understand the objects of the confederacy, as well as
 those of the separate nation; they studied a balance of power;
 the statesman of one country watched the designs and proceedings
 of another; and occasionally threw the weight of his tribe into a
 different scale. They had their alliances and their treaties,
 which, like the nations of Europe, they maintained, or they
 broke, upon reasons of state; and remained at peace from a sense
 of necessity or expediency, and went to war upon any emergence of
 provocation or jealousy.
     Thus, without any settled form of government, or any bond of
 union, but what resembled more the suggestion of instinct, than
 the invention of reason, they conducted themselves with the
 concert, and the force, of nations. Foreigners, without being
 able to discover who is the magistrate, or in what manner the
 senate is composed, always find a council with whom they may
 treat, or a band of warriors with whom they may fight. Without
 police or compulsory laws, their domestic society is conducted
 with order, and the absence of vicious dispositions, is a better
 security than any public establishment for the suppression of
 crimes.
     Disorders, however, sometimes occur, especially in times of
 debauch, when the immoderate use of intoxicating liquors, to
 which they are extremely addicted, suspends the ordinary caution
 of their demeanour, and inflaming their violent passions, engages
 them in quarrels and bloodshed. When a person is slain, his
 murderer is seldom called to an immediate account: but he has a
 quarrel to sustain with the family and the friends; or if a
 stranger, with the countrymen of the deceased; sometimes even
 with his own nation at home, if the injury committed be of a kind
 to alarm the society. The nation, the canton, or the family,
 endeavour, by presents, to atone for the offence of any of their
 members; and, by pacifying the parties aggrieved, endeavour to
 prevent what alarms the community more than the first disorder,
 the subsequent effects of revenge and animosity. (11*) The
 shedding of blood, however, if the guilty person remain where he
 has committed the crime, seldom escapes unpunished: the friend of
 the deceased knows how to disguise, though not to suppress, his
 resentment; and even after many years have elapsed, is sure to
 repay the injury that was done to his kindred or his house.
     These considerations render them cautious and circumspect,
 put them on their guard against their passions, and give to their
 ordinary deportment an air of phlegm and composure superior to
 what is possessed among polished nations. They are, in the mean
 time, affectionate in their carriage, and in their conversations
 pay a mutual attention and regard, says Charlevoix, more tender
 and more engaging, than what we profess in the ceremonial of
 polished societies.
     This writer has observed, that the nations among whom he
 travelled in North America, never mentioned acts of generosity or
 kindness under the notion of duty. They acted from affection, as
 they acted from appetite, without regard to its consequences.
 When they had done a kindness, they had gratified a desire; the
 business was finished, and passed from the memory. When they
 received a favour, it might, or it might not, prove the occasion
 of friendship: if it did not, the parties appeared to have no
 apprehensions of gratitude, as a duty by which the one was bound
 to make a return, or the other intitled to reproach the person
 who had failed in his part. The spirit with which they give or
 receive presents, is the same which Tacitus observed among the
 ancient Germans: They delight in them, but do not consider them
 as matter of obligation.(12*) Such gifts are of little
 consequence, except when employed as the seal of a bargain or
 treaty.
     It was their favourite maxim, That no man is naturally
 indebted to another; that he is not, therefore, obliged to bear
 with any imposition, or unequal(13*) treatment. Thus, in a
 principle apparently sullen and inhospitable, they have
 discovered the foundation of justice, and observe its rules, with
 a steadiness and candour which no cultivation has been found to
 improve. The freedom which they give in what relates to the
 supposed duties of kindness and friendship, serves only to engage
 the heart more entirely, where it is once possessed with
 affection. We love to chuse our object without any restraint, and
 we consider kindness itself as a task, when the duties of
 friendship are exacted by rule. We therefore, by our demand for
 attentions, rather corrupt than improve the system of morality;
 and by our exactions of gratitude, and our frequent proposals to
 inforce its observance, we only shew, that we have mistaken its
 nature; we only give symptoms of that growing sensibility to
 interest, from which we measure the expediency of friendship and
 generosity itself; and by which we would introduce the spirit of
 traffic into the commerce of affection. In consequence of this
 proceeding, we are often obliged to decline a favour with the
 same spirit that we throw off a servile engagement, or reject a
 bribe. To the unrefining savage every favour is welcome, and
 every present received without reserve or reflection.
     The love of equality, and the love of justice, were
 originally the same: and although, by the constitution of
 different societies, unequal privileges are bestowed on their
 members; and although justice itself requires a proper regard to
 be paid to such privileges; yet he who has forgotten that men
 were originally equal, easily degenerates into a slave; or in the
 capacity of a master, is not to be trusted with the rights of his
 fellow-creatures. This happy principle gives to the mind its
 sense of independence, renders it indifferent to the favours
 which are in the power of other men, checks it in the commission
 of injuries, and leaves the heart open to the affections of
 generosity and kindness. It gives to the untutored American that
 air of candour, and of regard to the welfare of others, which, in
 some degree, softens the arrogant pride of his carriage, and in
 times of confidence and peace, without the assistance of
 government or law, renders the approach and commerce of strangers
 secure.
     Among this people, the foundations of honour are eminent
 abilities and great fortitude; not the distinctions of equipage
 and fortune: The talents in esteem are such as their situation
 leads them to employ, the exact knowledge of a country, and
 stratagem in war. On these qualifications, a captain among the
 Caribbees underwent an examination. When a new leader was to be
 chosen, a scout was sent forth to traverse the forests which led
 to the enemy's country, and, upon his return, the candidate was
 desired to find the track in which he had travelled. A brook, or
 a fountain, was named to him on the frontier, and he was desired
 to find the nearest path to a particular station, and to plant a
 stake in the place.(14*) They can, accordingly, trace a wild
 beast, or the human foot, over many leagues of a pathless forest,
 and find their way across a woody and uninhabited continent, by
 means of refined observations, which escape the traveller who has
 been accustomed to different aids. They steer in slender canoes,
 across stormy seas, with a dexterity equal to that of the most
 experienced pilot.(15*) They carry a penetrating eye for the
 thoughts and intentions of those with whom they have to deal; and
 when they mean to deceive, they cover themselves with arts which
 the most subtile can seldom elude. They harangue in their public
 councils with a nervous and figurative elocution; and conduct
 themselves in the management of their treaties with a perfect
 discernment of their national interests.
     Thus being able masters in the detail of their own affairs,
 and well qualified to acquit themselves on particular occasions,
 they study no science, and go in pursuit of no general
 principles. They even seem incapable of attending to any distant
 consequences, beyond those they have experienced in hunting or
 war. They intrust the provision of every season to itself;
 consume the fruits of the earth in summer; and, in winter, are
 driven in quest of their prey, through woods, and over deserts
 covered with snow. They do not form in one hour those maxims
 which may prevent the errors of the next; and they fail in those
 apprehensions, which, in the intervals of passion, produce
 ingenuous shame, compassion, remorse, or a command of appetite.
 They are seldom made to repent of any violence; nor is a person,
 indeed, thought accountable in his sober mood, for what he did in
 the heat of a passion, or in a time of debauch.
     Their superstitions are groveling and mean: and did this
 happen among rude nations alone, we could not sufficiently admire
 the effects of politeness; but it is a subject on which few
 nations are intitled to censure their neighbours. When we have
 considered the superstitions of one people, we find little
 variety in those of another. They are but a repetition of similar
 weaknesses and absurdities, derived from a common source, a
 perplexed apprehension of invisible agents, that are supposed to
 guide all precarious events to which human foresight cannot
 extend.
     In what depends on the known or the regular course of nature,
 the mind trusts to itself; but in strange and uncommon
 situations, it is the dupe of its own perplexity, and, instead of
 relying on its prudence or courage, has recourse to divination,
 and a variety of observances, that, for being irrational, are
 always the more revered. Superstition being founded in doubts and
 anxiety, is fostered by ignorance and mystery. Its maxims, in the
 mean time, are not always confounded with those of common life;
 nor does its weakness or folly always prevent the watchfulness,
 penetration, and courage, men are accustomed to employ in the
 management of common affairs. A Roman consulting futurity by the
 pecking of birds, or a King of Sparta inspecting the intrails of
 a beast, Mithridates consulting his women on the interpretation
 of his dreams, are examples sufficient to prove, that a childish
 imbecility on this subject is consistent with the greatest
 military and political talents.
     Confidence in the effect of superstitious observances is not
 peculiar to any age or nation. Few, even of the accomplished
 Greeks and Romans, were able to shake off this weakness. In their
 case, it was not removed by the highest measures of civilization.
 It has yielded only to the light of true religion, or to the
 study of nature, by which we are led to substitute a wise
 providence operating by physical causes, in the place of phantoms
 that terrify or amuse the ignorant.
     The principal point of honour among the rude nations of
 America, as indeed in every instance where mankind are not
 greatly corrupted, is fortitude. Yet their way of maintaining
 this point of honour, is very different from that of the nations
 of Europe. Their ordinary method of making war is by ambuscade;
 and they strive, by over-reaching an enemy, to commit the
 greatest slaughter, or to make the greatest number of prisoners,
 with the least hazard to themselves. They deem it a folly to
 expose their own persons in assaulting an enemy, and do not
 rejoice in victories which are stained with the blood of their
 own people. They do not value themselves, as in Europe, on
 defying their enemy upon equal terms. They even boast, that they
 approach like foxes, or that they fly like birds, not less than
 that they devour like lions. In Europe, to fall in battle is
 accounted an honour; among the natives of America, it is reckoned
 disgraceful.(16*) They reserve their fortitude for the trials
 they abide when attacked by surprise, or when fallen into their
 enemies hands; and when they are obliged to maintain their own
 honour, and that of their nation, in the midst of torments that
 require efforts of patience more than of valour.
     On these occasions, they are far from allowing it to be
 supposed that they wish to decline the conflict. It is held
 infamous to avoid it, even by a voluntary death; and the greatest
 affront which can be offered to a prisoner, is to refuse him the
 honours of a man, in the manner of his execution: 'With-hold',
 says an old man, in the midst of his torture, 'the stabs of your
 knife; rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your allies,
 from beyond the seas, may learn to suffer like men.'(17*) With
 terms of defiance, the victim, in those solemn trials, commonly
 excites the animosity of his tormentors, as well as his own; and
 whilst we suffer for human nature, under the effect of its
 errors, we must admire its force.
     The people with whom this practice prevailed, were commonly
 desirous of repairing their own losses, by adopting prisoners of
 war into their families: and even in the last moment, the hand
 which was raised to torment, frequently gave the sign of
 adoption, by which the prisoner became the child or the brother
 of his enemy, and came to share in all the privileges of a
 citizen. In their treatment of those who suffered, they did not
 appear to be guided by principles of hatred or revenge: they
 observed the point of honour in applying as well as in bearing
 their torments; and, by a strange kind of affection and
 tenderness, were directed to be most cruel where they intended
 the highest respect: the coward was put to immediate death by the
 hands of women: the valiant was supposed to be intitled to all
 the trials of fortitude that men could invent or employ. 'It gave
 me joy,' says an old man to his captive, 'that so gallant a youth
 was allotted to my share: I proposed to have placed you on the
 couch of my nephew, who was slain by your countrymen; to have
 transferred all my tenderness to you; and to have solaced my age
 in your company: but maimed and mutilated as you now appear,
 death is better than life: prepare yourself therefore to die like
 a man.'(18*)
     It is perhaps with a view to these exhibitions, or rather in
 admiration of fortitude, the principle from which they proceed,
 that the Americans are so attentive, in their earliest years, to
 harden their nerves.(19*) The children are taught to vie with
 each other in bearing the sharpest torments; the youth are
 admitted into the class of manhood, after violent proofs of their
 patience; and leaders are put to the test, by famine, burning,
 and suffocation.(20*)
     It might be apprehended, that among rude nations, where the
 means of subsistence are procured with so much difficulty, the
 mind could never raise itself above the consideration of this
 subject; and that man would, in this condition, give examples of
 the meanest and most mercenary spirit. The reverse, however, is
 true. Directed in this particular by the desires of nature, men,
 in their simplest state, attend to the objects of appetite no
 further than appetite requires; and their desires of fortune
 extend no further than the meal which gratifies their hunger:
 they apprehend no superiority of rank in the possession of
 wealth, such as might inspire any habitual principle of
 covetousness, vanity, or ambition: they can apply to no task that
 engages no immediate passion, and take pleasure in no occupation
 that affords no dangers to be braved, and no honours to be won.
     It was not among the ancient Romans alone that commercial
 arts, or a sordid mind, were held in contempt. A like spirit
 prevails in every rude and independent society. 'I am a warrior,
 and not a merchant,' said an American to the governor of Canada,
 who proposed to give him goods in exchange for some prisoners he
 had taken; 'your cloaths and utensils do not tempt me; but my
 prisoners are now in your power, and you may seize them: if you
 do, I must go forth and take more prisoners, or perish in the
 attempt; and if that chance should befal me, I shall die like a
 man; but remember, that our nation will charge you as the cause
 of my death.'(21*) With these apprehensions, they have an
 elevation, and a stateliness of carriage, which the pride of
 nobility, where it is most revered by polished nations, seldom
 bestows.
     They are attentive to their persons, and employ much time, as
 well as endure great pain, in the methods they take to adorn
 their bodies, to give the permanent stains with which they are
 coloured, or preserve the paint, which they are perpetually
 repairing, in order to appear with advantage.
     Their aversion to every sort of employment which they hold to
 be mean, makes them pass great part of their time in idleness or
 sleep; and a man who, in pursuit of a wild beast, or to surprise
 his enemy, will traverse a hundred leagues on snow, will not, to
 procure his food, submit to any species of ordinary labour.
 'Strange,' says Tacitus, 'that the same person should be so much
 averse to repose, and so much addicted to sloth.'
     Games of hazard are not the invention of polished ages; men
 of curiosity have looked for their origin, in vain, among the
 monuments of an obscure antiquity; and it is probable that they
 belonged to times too remote and too rude even for the
 conjectures of antiquarians to reach. The very savage brings his
 furs, his utensils, and his beads, to the hazard-table: he finds
 here the passions and agitations which the applications of a
 tedious industry could not excite: and while the throw is
 depending, he tears his hair, and beats his breast, with a rage
 which the more accomplished gamester has sometimes learned to
 repress: he often quits the party naked, and stripped of all his
 possessions; or where slavery is in use, stakes his freedom to
 have one chance more to recover his former loss.(22*)
     With all these infirmities, vices, or respectable qualities,
 belonging to the human species in its rudest state; the love of
 society, friendship, and public affection, penetration,
 eloquence, and courage, appear to have been its original
 properties, not the subsequent effects of device or invention. If
 mankind are qualified to improve their manners, the subject was
 furnished by nature; and the effect of cultivation is not to
 inspire the sentiments of tenderness and generosity, nor to
 bestow the principal constituents of a respectable character, but
 to obviate the casual abuses of passion; and to prevent a mind,
 which feels the best dispositions in their greatest force, from
 being at times likewise the sport of brutal appetite and
 ungovernable violence.
     Were Lycurgus employed anew to operate on the materials we
 have described, he would find them, in many important
 particulars, prepared by nature herself for his use. His equality
 in matters of property being already established, he would have
 no faction to apprehend from the opposite interests of the poor
 and the rich; his senate, his assembly of the people, is
 constituted; his discipline is in some measure adopted; and the
 place of his helots is supplied by the task allotted to one of
 the sexes. With all these advantages, he would still have had a
 very important lesson for civil society to teach, that by which a
 few learn to command, and the many are taught to obey. he would
 have all his precautions to take against the future intrusion of
 mercenary arts, the admiration of luxury, and the passion for
 interest. he would still perhaps have a more difficult task than
 any of the former, in teaching his citizens the command of
 appetite, and an indifference to pleasure, as well as a contempt
 of pain; in teaching them to maintain, in the field, the
 formality of uniform precautions, and as much to avoid being
 themselves surprised, as they endeavour to surprise their enemy.
     For want of these advantages, rude nations in general, though
 they are patient of hardship and fatigue, though they are
 addicted to war, and are qualified by their stratagem and valour
 to throw terror into the armies of a more regular enemy; yet, in
 the course of a continued struggle, always yield to the superior
 arts, and the discipline of more civilized nations. Hence the
 Romans were able to over-run the provinces of Gaul, Germany, and
 Britain; and hence the Europeans have a growing ascendency over
 the nations of Africa and America.
     On the credit of a superiority which certain nations possess,
 they think that they have a claim to dominion; and even Caesar
 appears to have forgotten what were the passions, as well as the
 rights of mankind, when he complained, that the Britons, after
 having sent him a submissive message to Gaul, perhaps to prevent
 his invasion, still pretended to fight for their liberties, and
 to oppose his descent on their island.(23*)
     There is not, perhaps, in the whole description of mankind, a
 circumstance more remarkable than that mutual contempt and
 aversion which nations, under a different state of commercial
 arts, bestow on each other. Addicted to their own pursuits, and
 considering their own condition as the standard of human
 felicity, all nations pretend to the preference, and in their
 practice give sufficient proof of sincerity. Even the savage
 still less than the citizen, can be made to quit that manner of
 life in which he is trained: he loves that freedom of mind which
 will not be bound to any task, and which owns no superior:
 however tempted to mix with polished nations, and to better his
 fortune, the first moment of liberty brings him back to the woods
 again; he droops and he pines in the streets of the populous
 city; he wanders dissatisfied over the open and the cultivated
 field; he seeks the frontier and the forest, where, with a
 constitution prepared to undergo the hardships and the
 difficulties of the situation, he enjoys a delicious freedom from
 care, and a seducing society, where no rules of behaviour are
 prescribed, but the simple dictates of the heart.
 
 
 Section III
 
 Of Rude Nations under the Impressions of Property and Interest
 
     It was a proverbial imprecation in use among the hunting
 nations on the confines of Siberia, That their enemy might be
 obliged to live like a Tartar, and be seized with the folly of
 breeding and attending his cattle.(24*) Nature, it seems, in
 their apprehension, by storing the woods and the desert with
 game, rendered the task of the herdsman unnecessary, and left to
 man only the trouble of selecting and of seizing his prey.
     The indolence of mankind, or rather their aversion to any
 application in which they are not engaged by immediate instinct
 and passion, retards their progress in extending the notion of
 property. It has been found, however, even while the means of
 subsistence are left in common, and the stock of the public is
 yet undivided, that this notion is already applied to different
 subjects; as the fur and the bow pertain to the individual, the
 cottage, with its furniture, are appropriated to the family.
     When the parent begins to desire a better provision for his
 children than is found under the promiscuous management of many
 copartners, when he has applied his labour and his skill apart,
 he aims at an exclusive possession, and seeks the property of the
 soil, as well as the use of its fruits.
     When the individual no longer finds among his associates the
 same inclination to commit every subject to public use, he is
 seized with concern for his personal fortune. and is alarmed by
 the cares which every person entertains for himself. He is urged
 as much by emulation and jealousy, as by the sense of necessity.
 He suffers considerations of interest to rest on his mind, and
 when every present appetite is sufficiently gratified, he can act
 with a view to futurity, or rather finds an object of vanity in
 having amassed what is become a subject of competition, and a
 matter of universal esteem. Upon this motive, where violence is
 restrained, he can apply his hand to lucrative arts, confine
 himself to a tedious task, and wait with patience for the distant
 returns of his labour.
     Thus mankind acquire industry by many and by slow degrees.
 They are taught to regard their interest; they are taught to
 abstain from unlawful profits; they are secured in the possession
 of what they fairly obtain; and by these methods the habits of
 the labourer, the mechanic, and the trader, are gradually formed.
 A hoard, collected from the simple productions of nature, or a
 herd of cattle, are, in every rude nation, the first species of
 wealth. The circumstances of the soil, and the climate, determine
 whether the inhabitant shall apply himself chiefly to agriculture
 or pasture; whether he shall fix his residence, or be moving
 continually about with all his possessions.
     In the west of Europe; in America, from south to north, with
 a few exceptions; in the torrid zone, and every where within the
 warmer climates; mankind have generally applied themselves to
 some species of agriculture, and have been disposed to
 settlement. In the east and the north of Asia, they depended
 entirely on their herds, and were perpetually shifting their
 ground in search of new pasture. The arts which pertain to
 settlement have been practised, and variously cultivated, by the
 inhabitants of Europe. Those which are consistent with perpetual
 migration, have, from the earliest accounts of history, remained
 nearly the same with the Scythian or Tartar. The tent pitched on
 a moveable carriage, the horse applied to every purpose of
 labour, and of war, of the dairy, and of the butcher's stall,
 from the earliest to the latest accounts, have made up the riches
 and equipage of this wandering people.
     But in whatever way rude nations subsist, there are certain
 points in which, under the first impressions of property, they
 nearly agree. Homer either lived with a people in this stage of
 their progress, or found himself engaged to exhibit their
 character. Tacitus has made them the subject of a particular
 treatise; and if this be an aspect under which mankind deserve to
 be viewed, it must be confessed, that we have singular advantages
 in collecting their features. The portrait has already been drawn
 by the ablest hands, and gives, at one view, in the writings of
 these celebrated authors, whatever has been scattered in the
 relations of historians, or whatever we have opportunities to
 observe in the actual manners of men, who still remain in a
 similar state.
     In passing from the condition we have described, to this we
 have at present in view, mankind still retain many parts of their
 earliest character. They are still averse to labour, addicted to
 war, admirers of fortitude, and, in the language of Tacitus, more
 lavish of their blood than of their sweat.(25*) They are fond of
 fantastic ornaments in their dress, and endeavour to fill up the
 listless intervals of a life addicted to violence, with hazardous
 sports, and with games of chance. Every servile occupation they
 commit to women or slaves. But we may apprehend, that the
 individual having now found a separate interest, the bands of
 society must become less firm, and domestic disorders more
 frequent. The members of any community, being distinguished among
 themselves by unequal shares in the distribution of property, the
 ground of a permanent and palpable subordination is laid.
     These particulars accordingly take place among mankind, in
 passing from the savage to what may be called the barbarous
 state. Members of the same community enter into quarrels of
 competition or revenge. They unite in following leaders, who are
 distinguished by their fortunes, and by the lustre of their
 birth. They join the desire of spoil with the love of glory; and
 from an opinion, that what is acquired by force, justly pertains
 to the victor, they become hunters of men, and bring every
 contest to the decision of the sword.
     Every nation is a band of robbers, who prey without
 restraint, or remorse, on their neighbours. Cattle, Says
 Achilles, may be seized in every field; and the coasts of the
 Aegean sea were accordingly pillaged by the heroes of Homer, for
 no other reason, than because those heroes chose to possess
 themselves of the brass and iron, the cattle, the slaves, and the
 women, which were found among the nations around them.
     A Tartar mounted on his horse, is an animal of prey, who only
 inquires where cattle are to be found, and how far he must go to
 possess them. The monk, who had fallen under the displeasure of
 Mangu Chan, made his peace, by promising, that the Pope, and the
 Christian princes, should make a surrender of all their
 herds.(26*)
     A similar spirit reigned, without exception, in all the
 barbarous nations of Europe, Asia, and Africa. The antiquities of
 Greece and Italy, and the fables of every ancient poet, contain
 examples of its force. It was this spirit that brought our
 ancestors first into the provinces of the Roman empire; and that
 afterward, more perhaps than their reverence for the cross, led
 them to the East, to share with the Tartars in the spoils of the
 Saracen empire.
     From the descriptions contained in the last section, we may
 incline to believe, that mankind, in their simplest state, are on
 the eve of erecting republics. Their love of equality, their
 habit of assembling in public councils, and their zeal for the
 tribe to which they belong, are qualifications that fit them to
 act under that species of government; and they seem to have but a
 few steps to make, in order to reach its establishment. They have
 only to define the numbers of which their councils shall consist,
 and to settle the forms of their meeting: They have only to
 bestow a permanent authority for repressing disorders, and to
 enact a few rules in favour of that justice they have already
 acknowledged, and from inclination so strictly observe.
     But these steps are far from being so easily made, as they
 appear on a slight or a transient view. The resolution of
 chusing, from among their equals, the magistrate to whom they
 give from thenceforward a right to controul their own actions, is
 far from the thoughts of simple men; and no eloquence, perhaps,
 could make them adopt this measure, or give them any sense of its
 use.
     Even after nations have chosen a military leader, they do not
 intrust him with any species of civil authority. The captain,
 among the Caribbees, did not pretend to decide in domestic
 disputes; the terms jurisdiction and government were unknown in
 their tongue.(27*)
     Before this important change is admitted, men must be
 accustomed to the distinction of ranks; and before they are
 sensible that subordination is matter of choice, must arrive at
 unequal conditions by chance. In desiring property, they only
 mean to secure their subsistence: but the brave who lead in war,
 have likewise the largest share in its spoils. The eminent are
 fond of devising hereditary honours; and the multitude, who
 admire the parent, are ready to extend their esteem to his
 offspring.
     Possessions descend, and the lustre of family grows brighter
 with age. Hercules, who perhaps was an eminent warrior, became a
 god with posterity, and his race was set apart for royalty and
 sovereign power. When the distinctions of fortune and those of
 birth are conjoined, the chieftain enjoys a pre-eminence, as well
 at the feast as in the field. His followers take their place in
 subordinate stations; and instead of considering themselves as
 parts of a community, they rank as the followers of a chieftain,
 and take their designation from the name of their leader. They
 find a new object of public affection, in defending his person,
 and in supporting his station; they lend of their substance to
 form his estate; they are guided by his smiles and his frowns;
 and court, as the highest distinction, a share in the feast which
 their own contributions have furnished.
     As the former state of mankind seemed to point at democracy,
 this seems to exhibit the rudiments of monarchical government.
 But it is yet far short of that establishment which is known in
 after ages by the name of monarchy. The distinction between the
 leader and the follower, the prince and the subject, is still but
 imperfectly marked: their pursuits and occupations are not
 different; their minds are not unequally cultivated; they feed
 from the same dish; they sleep together on the ground; the
 children of the king, as well as those of the subject, are
 employed in tending the flock; and the keeper of the swine was a
 prime counsellor at the court of Ulysses.
     The chieftain, sufficiently distinguished from his tribe, to
 excite their admiration, and to flatter their vanity by a
 supposed affinity to his noble descent, is the object of their
 veneration, not of their envy: he is considered as the common
 bond of connection, not as their common master; is foremost in
 danger, and has a principal share in their troubles: his glory is
 placed in the number of his attendants, in his superior
 magnanimity and valour; that of his followers, in being ready to
 shed their blood in his service.(28*)
     The frequent practice of war tends to strengthen the bands of
 society, and the practice of depredation itself engages men in
 trials of mutual attachment and courage. What threatened to ruin
 and overset every good disposition in the human breast, what
 seemed to banish justice from the societies of men, tends to
 unite the species in clans and fraternities; formidable, indeed,
 and hostile to one another, but in the domestic society of each,
 faithful disinterested, and generous. Frequent dangers, and the
 experience of fidelity and valour, awaken the love of those
 virtues, render them a subject of admiration, and endear their
 possessors.
     Actuated by great passions, the love of glory, and the desire
 of victory. roused by the menaces of an enemy, or stung with
 revenge; in suspense between the prospects of ruin or conquest,
 the barbarian spends every moment of relaxation in the indulgence
 of sloth. He cannot descend to the pursuits of industry or
 mechanical labour: the beast of prey is a sluggard; the hunter
 and the warrior sleeps, while women or slaves are made to toil
 for his bread. But shew him a quarry at a distance, he is bold,
 impetuous, artful, and rapacious: no bar can withstand his
 violence, and no fatigue can allay his activity.
     Even under this description mankind are generous and
 hospitable to strangers, as well as kind, affectionate, and
 gentle, in their domestic society.(29*) Friendship and enmity are
 to them terms of the greatest importance: they mingle not their
 functions together; they have singled out their enemy, and they
 have chosen their friend. Even in depredation, the principal
 object is glory; and spoil is considered as a badge of victory.
 Nations and tribes are their prey: the solitary traveller, by
 whom they can acquire only the reputation of generosity, is
 suffered to pass unhurt, or is treated with splendid munificence.
     Though distinguished into small cantons under their several
 chieftains, and for the most part separated by jealousy and
 animosity; yet when pressed by wars and formidable enemies, they
 sometimes unite in greater bodies. Like the Greeks in their
 expedition to Troy, they follow some remarkable leader, and
 compose a kingdom of many separate tribes. But such coalitions
 are merely occasional; and even during their continuance, more
 resemble republic than monarchy. The inferior chieftains reserve
 their importance, and intrude, with an air of equality, into the
 councils of their leader, as the people of their several clans
 commonly intrude upon them.(30*) Upon what motive indeed could we
 suppose, that men who live together in the greatest familiarity,
 and amongst whom the distinctions of rank are so obscurely
 marked, would resign their personal sentiments and inclinations,
 or pay an implicit submission to a leader who can neither overawe
 nor corrupt?
     Military force must be employed to extort, or the hire of the
 venal to buy, that engagement which the Tartar comes under to his
 prince, when he promises, 'That he will go where he shall be
 commanded; that he will come when he shall be called; that he
 will kill whoever is pointed out to him; and, for the future,
 that he will consider the voice of the King as a sword.'(31*)
     These are the terms to which even the stubborn heart of the
 barbarian has been reduced, in consequence of a despotism he
 himself had established; and men have, in that low state of the
 commercial arts, in Europe, as well as in Asia, tasted of
 political slavery. When interest prevails in every breast, the
 sovereign and his party cannot escape the infection: he employs
 the force with which he is intrusted, to turn his people into a
 property, and to Command their possessions for his profit or his
 pleasure. If riches are by any people made the standard of good
 and of evil, let them beware of the powers they intrust to their
 prince. 'With the Suiones,' says Tacitus, 'riches are in high
 esteem; and this people are accordingly disarmed, and reduced to
 slavery.'(32*)
     It is in this woful condition that mankind, being slavish,
 interested, insidious, deceitful, and bloody, bear marks, if not
 of the least curable, surely of the most lamentable, sort of
 corruption.(33*) Among them, war is the mere practice of rapine,
 to enrich the individual; commerce is turned into a system of
 snares and impositions; and government by turns oppressive or
 weak.
     It were happy for the human race, when guided by interest,
 and not governed by laws, that being split into nations of a
 moderate extent, they found in every canton some natural bar to
 its further enlargement, and met with occupation enough in
 maintaining their independence, without being able to extend
 their dominion.
     There is not disparity of rank, among men in rude ages,
 sufficient to give their communities the form of legal monarchy;
 and in a territory of considerable extent, when united under one
 head, the warlike and turbulent spirit of its inhabitants seems
 to require the bridle of despotism and military force. Where any
 degree of freedom remains, the powers of the prince are, as they
 were in most of the rude monarchies of Europe, extremely
 precarious, and depend chiefly on his personal character: where,
 on the contrary, the powers of the prince are above the control
 of his people, they are likewise above the restrictions of law.
 Rapacity and terror become the predominant motives of conduct,
 and form the character of the only parties into which mankind are
 divided, that of the oppressor, and that of the oppressed.
     This calamity threatened Europe for ages, under the conquest
 and settlement of its new inhabitants.(34*) It has actually taken
 place in Asia, where similar conquests have been made; and even
 without the ordinary opiates of effeminacy, or a servile
 weakness, founded on luxury, it has surprised the Tartar on his
 wain, in the rear of his herds. Among this people, in the heart
 of a great continent, bold and enterprising warriors arose: they
 subdued, by surprise, or superior abilities, the contiguous
 hords; they gained, in their progress, accessions of numbers and
 of strength; and, like a torrent increasing as it descends,
 became too strong for any bar that could be opposed to their
 passage. The conquering tribe, during a succession of ages,
 furnished the prince with his guards; and while they themselves
 were allowed to share in its spoils, were the voluntary tools of
 oppression, In this manner has despotism and corruption made
 their way into regions so much renowned for the wild freedom of
 nature: a power which was the terror of every effeminate province
 is disarmed, and the nursery of nations is itself gone to
 decay.(35*)
     Where rude nations escape this calamity, they require the
 exercise of foreign wars to maintain domestic peace: when no
 enemy appears from abroad, they have leisure for private feuds,
 and employ that courage in their dissensions at home, which, in
 time of war, is employed in defence of their country.
     'Among the Gauls,' says Caesar, 'there are subdivisions, not
 only in every nation, and in every district and village, but
 almost in every house, every one must fly to some patron for
 protection.'(36*) In this distribution of parties, not only the
 feuds of clans, but the quarrels of families, even the
 differences and competitions of individuals, are decided by
 force. The sovereign, when unassisted by superstition, endeavours
 in vain to employ his jurisdiction, or to procure a submission to
 the decisions of law. By a people who are accustomed to owe their
 possessions to violence, and who despise fortune itself without
 the reputation of courage, no umpire is admitted but the sword.
 Scipio offered his arbitration to terminate the competition of
 two Spaniards in a disputed succession: 'That,' said they, 'we
 have already refused to our relations: we do not submit our
 difference to the judgement of men; and even among the gods, we
 appeal to Mars alone.'(37*)
     It is well known that the nations of Europe carried this mode
 of proceeding to a degree of formality unheard of in other parts
 of the world: the civil and criminal judge could, in most cases,
 do no more than appoint the lists, and leave the parties to
 decide their cause by the combat: they apprehended that the
 victor had a verdict of the gods in his favour: and when they
 dropped in any instance this extraordinary form of process, they
 substituted in its place some other more capricious appeal to
 chance; in which they likewise thought that the judgement of the
 gods was declared.
     The fierce nations of Europe were even fond of the combat as
 an exercise and a sport. In the absence of real quarrels,
 companions challenged each other to a trial of skill, in which
 one of them frequently perished. When Scipio celebrated the
 funeral of his father and his uncle, the Spaniards came in pairs
 to fight, and, by a public exhibition of their duels, to increase
 the solemnity.(38*)
     In this wild and lawless state, where the effects of true
 religion would have been so desireable, and so salutary,
 superstition frequently disputes the ascendant even with the
 admiration of valour; and an order of men, like the Druids among
 the ancient Gauls and Britons,(39*) or some pretender to
 divination, as at the Cape of Good Hope, finds, in the credit
 which is paid to his sorcery, a way to the possession of power:
 his magic wand comes in competition with the sword itself; and,
 in the manner of the Druids, gives the first rudiments of civil
 government to some, or, like the supposed descendent of the sun
 among the Natchez, and the Lama among the Tartars, to others, an
 early taste of despotism and absolute slavery.
     We are generally at a loss to conceive how mankind can
 subsist under customs and manners extremely different from our
 own; and we are apt to exaggerate the misery of barbarous times,
 by an imagination of what we ourselves should suffer in a
 situation to which we are not accustomed. But every age hath its
 consolations, as well as its sufferings.(40*) In the interval of
 occasional outrages, the friendly intercourses of men, even in
 their rudest condition, is affectionate and. happy (41*) in rude
 ages, the persons and properties of individuals are secure;
 because each has a friend, as well as an enemy; and if the one is
 disposed to molest, the other is ready to protect; and the very
 admiration of valour, which in some instances tends to sanctify
 violence, inspires likewise certain maxims of generosity and
 honour, that tend to prevent the commission of wrongs.
     Men bear with the defects of their policy, as they do with
 hardships and inconveniencies in their manner of living. The
 alarms and the fatigues of war become a necessary recreation to
 those who are accustomed to them, and who have the tone of their
 passions raised above less animating or trying occasions. Old
 men, among the courtiers of Attila, wept, when they heard of
 heroic deeds, which they themselves could no longer perform.(42*)
 And among the Celtic nations, when age rendered the warrior unfit
 for his former toils, it was the custom, in order to abridge the
 languors of a listless and inactive life, to sue for death at the
 hands of his friends.(43*)
     With all this ferocity of spirit, the rude nations of the
 West were subdued by the policy and more regular warfare of the
 Romans. The point of honour, which the barbarians of Europe
 adopted as individuals, exposed them to a peculiar disadvantage,
 by rendering them, even in their national wars, averse to
 assailing their enemy by surprise, or taking the benefit of
 stratagem; and though separately bold and intrepid, yet, like
 other rude nations, they were, when assembled in great bodies,
 addicted to superstition, and subject to panics.
     They were, from a consciousness of their personal courage and
 force, sanguine on the eve of battle; they were, beyond the
 bounds of moderation, elated on success, and dejected in
 adversity. and being disposed to consider every event as a
 judgement of the gods, they were never qualified by an uniform
 application of prudence, to make the most of their forces, to
 repair their misfortunes, or to improve their advantages.
     Resigned to the government of affection and passion, they
 were generous and faithful where they had fixed an attachment;
 implacable, froward, and cruel, where they had conceived a
 dislike: addicted to debauchery, and the immoderate use of
 intoxicating liquors, they deliberated on the affairs of state in
 the heat of their riot; and in the same dangerous moments,
 conceived the designs of military enterprise, or terminated their
 domestic dissensions by the dagger or the sword.
     In their wars they preferred death to captivity. The
 victorious armies of the Romans, in entering a town by assault,
 or inforcing an incampment, have found the mother in the act of
 destroying her children, that they might not be taken; and the
 dagger of the parent, red with the blood of his family, ready to
 be plunged at last into his own breast.(44*)
     In all these particulars we perceive that vigour of spirit,
 which renders disorder itself respectable, and which qualities
 men, if fortunate in their situation, to lay the basis of
 domestic liberty, as well as to maintain against foreign enemies
 their national independence and freedom.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. Hume's History, ch. 8, p. 278.
 
 2. Ibid., p. 73.
 
 3. History of the Caribbees.
 
 4. Charlevoix.
 
 5. Lafitau.
 
 6. Ibid.
 
 7. Charlevoix.
 
 8. Wafer's account of the Isthmus of Darien.
 
 9. Colden's History of the Five Nations.
 
 10. Lafitau, Charlevoix, Colden, etc.
 
 11. Lafitau.
 
 12. Muneribus gaudent, sed nec data imputant, nec acceptis
 obligantur.
 
 13. Charlevoix.
 
 14. Lafitau.
 
 15. Charlevoix.
 
 16. Charlevoix.
 
 17. Colden.
 
 18. Charlevoix.
 
 19. Ibid. This writer says, that he has seen a boy and a girl,
 having bound their naked arms together, place a burning coal
 between them, to try who would shake it off first.
 
 20. Lafitau.
 
 21. Charlevoix.
 
 22. Tacitus, Lafitau, Charlevoix.
 
 23. Caesar questus, quod quum ultro in continentem legatis missis
 pacem a se petissent, bellum sine causa intulissent. Lib. 4.
 
 24. Abulgaze's Genealogical History of the Tartars.
 
 25. Pirgum quin immo et iners videtur, sudore acquirere qod
 possis sanguine parare.
 
 26. Rubruquis.
 
 27. History of the Caribbees.
 
 28. Tacitus, De moribus Germanorum.
 
 29. Jean du Plan Carpen. Rubruquis, Caesar, Tacit.
 
 30. Kolbe, Description of the Cape of Good Hope.
 
 31. Simon de St Quintin.
 
 32. De moribus Germanorum.
 
 33. Chardin's Travels.
 
 34. See Hume's History of the Tudors. -- There seemed to be
 nothing wanting to establish a perfect despotism in that house,
 but a few regiments of troops under the command of the crown.
 
 35. See the History of the Huns.
 
 36. De Bello Gallico, lib. 6.
 
 37. Livy.
 
 38. Livy, lib. 3.
 
 39. Caesar.
 
 40. Priscus, when employed on an embassy to Attila, was accosted
 in Greek, by a person who wore the dress of a Scythian. Having
 expressed surprise, and being desirous to know the cause of his
 stay in so wild a company, was told, that this Greek had been a
 captive, and for some time a slave, till he obtained his liberty
 in reward of some remarkable action. 'I live more happily here,'
 says he, 'than ever I did under the Roman government: for they
 who live with the Scythians, if they can endure the fatigues of
 war, have nothing else to molest them; they enjoy their
 possession undisturbed: whereas you are continually a prey to
 foreign enemies, or to bad government; you are forbid to carry
 arms in your own defence; you suffer from the remissness and ill
 conduct of those who are appointed to protect you; the evils of
 peace are even worse than those of war; no punishment is ever
 inflicted on the powerful or the rich; no mercy is shown to the
 poor; although your institutions were wisely devised, yet in the
 management of corrupted men, their effects are pernicious and
 cruel.' Excerpta de legationibus.
 
 41. D'Arvieux' History of the Wild Arabs.
 
 42. Ibid.
 
 43. Ubi transcendit florentes viribus annos,
     Impatiens aevi spernit novisse senectam.
                             Silius, lib. I, 225.
 
 44. Liv. lib. xli. II. Dio. Cass.
 
 