




Part Sixth.
 
 Of Corruption and Political Slavery.
 
 
 Section I.
 
 Of Corruption in general
 
     If the fortune of nations, and their tendency to
 aggrandisement, or to ruin, were to be estimated by merely
 balancing, on the principles of last section, articles of profit
 and loss, every argument in politics would rest on a comparison
 of national expence with national gain; on a comparison of the
 numbers who consume, with those who produce or amass the
 necessaries of life. The columns of the industrious, and the
 idle, would include all orders of men; and the state itself,
 being allowed as many magistrates, politicians, and warriors, as
 were barely sufficient for its defence and its government, should
 place, on the side of its loss, every name that is supernumerary
 on the civil or the military list; all those orders of men, who,
 by the possession of fortune, subsist on the gains of others, and
 by the nicety of their choice, require a great expence of time
 and of labour, to supply their consumption; all those who are
 idly employed in the train of persons of rank; all those who are
 engaged in the professions of law, physic, or divinity, together
 with all the learned, who do not, by their studies, promote or
 improve the practice of some lucrative trade. The value of every
 person, in short, should be computed from his labour; and that of
 labour itself, from its tendency to procure and amass the means
 of subsistence. The arts employed on mere superfluities should be
 prohibited, except when their produce could be exchanged with
 foreign nations, for commodities that might be employed to
 maintain useful men for the public.
     These appear to be the rules by which a miser would examine
 the state of his own affairs, or those of his country; but
 schemes of perfect corruption are at least as impracticable as
 schemes of perfect virtue. Men are not universally misers; they
 will not be satisfied with the pleasure of hoarding; they must be
 suffered to enjoy their wealth, in order that they may take the
 trouble of becoming rich. Property, in the common course of human
 affairs, is unequally divided: we are therefore obliged to suffer
 the wealthy to squander, that the poor may subsist; we are
 obliged to tolerate certain orders of men, who are above the
 necessity of labour, in order that, in their condition, there may
 be an object of ambition, and a rank to which the busy aspire. We
 are not only obliged to admit numbers, who, in strict oeconomy,
 may be reckoned superfluous, on the civil, the military, and the
 political list; but because we are men, and prefer the
 occupation, improvement, and felicity of our nature, to its mere
 existence, we must even wish, that as many members as possible,
 of every community, may be admitted to a share of its defence and
 its government.
     Men, in fact, while they pursue in society different objects,
 or separate views, procure a wide distribution of power, and by a
 species of chance, arrive at a posture for civil engagements,
 more favourable to human nature than what human wisdom could ever
 calmly devise.
     If the strength of a nation, in the mean time, consists in
 the men on whom it may rely, and who are fortunately or wisely
 combined for its preservation, it follows, that manners are as
 important as either numbers or wealth; and that corruption is to
 be accounted a principal cause of national declension and ruin.
     Whoever perceives what are the qualities of man in his
 excellence, may easily, by that standard, distinguish his defects
 or corruptions. If an intelligent, a courageous, and an
 affectionate mind, constitutes the perfection of his nature,
 remarkable failings in any of those particulars, must
 proportionally sink or debase his character.
     We have observed, that it is the happiness of the individual
 to make a right choice of his conduct; that this choice will lead
 him to lose in society the sense of a personal interest; and, in
 the consideration of what is due to the whole, to stifle those
 anxieties which relate to himself as a part.
     The natural disposition of man to humanity, and the warmth of
 his temper, may raise his character to this fortunate pitch. His
 elevation, in a great measure, depends on the form of his
 society; but he can, without incurring the charge of corruption,
 accommodate himself to great variations in the constitutions of
 government. The same integrity, and vigorous spirit, which, in
 democratical states, renders him tenacious of his equality, may,
 under aristocracy or monarchy, lead him to maintain the
 subordinations established. He may entertain, towards the
 different ranks of men with whom he is yoked in the state, maxims
 of respect and of candour. he may, in the choice of his actions,
 follow a principle of justice, and of honour, which the
 considerations of safety, preferment, or profit, cannot efface.
     From our complaints of national depravity, it should,
 notwithstanding, appear, that whole bodies of men are sometimes
 infected with an epidemical weakness of the head, or corruption
 of heart, by which they become unfit for the stations they
 occupy, and threaten the states they compose, however
 flourishing, with a prospect of decay, and of ruin.
     A change of national manners for the worse, may arise from a
 discontinuance of the scenes in which the talents of men were
 happily cultivated, and brought into exercise; or from a change
 in the prevailing opinions relating to the constituents of
 honours or of happiness. When mere riches, or court-favour, are
 supposed to constitute rank; the mind is misled from the
 consideration of qualities on which it ought to rely.
 Magnanimity, courage, and the love of mankind, are sacrificed to
 avarice and vanity, or suppressed under a sense of dependence.
 The individual considers his community so far only as it can be
 rendered subservient to his personal advancement or profit: he
 states himself in competition with his fellow-creatures; and,
 urged by the passions of emulation, of fear and jealousy, of envy
 and malice, he follows the maxims of an animal destined to
 preserve his separate existence, and to indulge his caprice or
 his appetite, at the expence of his species.
     On this corrupt foundation, men become either rapacious,
 deceitful, and violent, ready to trespass on the rights of
 others; or servile, mercenary, and base, prepared to relinquish
 their own. Talents, capacity, and force of mind, possessed by a
 person of the first description, serve to plunge him the deeper
 in misery, and to sharpen the agony of cruel passions; which lead
 him to wreak on his fellow-creatures the torments that prey on
 himself. To a person of the second, imagination, and reason
 itself, only serve to point out false objects of fear, or desire,
 and to multiply the subjects of disappointment, and of momentary
 joy. In either case, and whether we suppose that corrupt men are
 urged by covetousness, or betrayed by fear, and without
 specifying the crimes which from either disposition they are
 prepared to commit, we may safely affirm, with Socrates, 'That
 every master should pray he may not meet with such a slave; and
 every such person, being unfit for liberty, should implore that
 he may meet with a merciful master.'
     Man, under this measure of corruption, although he may be
 bought for a slave by those who know how to turn his faculties
 and his labour to profit; and although, when kept under proper
 restraints, his neighbourhood may be convenient or useful; yet is
 certainly unfit to act on the footing of a liberal combination or
 concert with his fellow-creatures: his mind is not addicted to
 friendship or confidence; he is not willing to act for the
 preservation of others, nor deserves that any other should hazard
 his own safety for his.
     The actual character of mankind, mean-time, in the worst, as
 well as the best condition, is undoubtedly mixed: and nations of
 the best description are greatly obliged for their preservation,
 not only to the good disposition of their members, but likewise
 to those political institutions, by which the violent are
 restrained from the commission of crimes, and the cowardly, or
 the selfish, are made to contribute their part to the public
 defence or prosperity. By means of such institutions, and the
 wise precautions of government, nations are enabled to subsist,
 and even to prosper, under very different degrees of corruption,
 or of public integrity.
     So long as the majority of a people is supposed to act on
 maxims of probity, the example of the good, and even the caution
 of the bad, give a general appearance of integrity, and of
 innocence. Where men are to one another objects of affection and
 of confidence, where they are generally disposed not to offend,
 government may be remiss; and every person may be treated as
 innocent, till he is found to be guilty. As the subject in this
 case does not hear of the crimes, so he need not be told of the
 punishments inflicted on persons of a different character. But
 where the manners of a people are considerably changed for the
 worse, every subject must stand on his guard, and government
 itself must act on suitable maxims of fear and distrust. The
 individual, no longer fit to be indulged in his pretensions to
 personal consideration, independence, or freedom, each of which
 he would turn to abuse, must be taught, by external force, and
 from motives of fear, to counterfeit those effects of innocence,
 and of duty, to which he is not disposed: he must be referred to
 the whip, or the gibbet, for arguments in support of a caution,
 which the state now requires him to assume, on a supposition that
 he is insensible to the motives which recommend the practice of
 virtue.
     The rules of despotism are made for the government of
 corrupted men. They were indeed followed on some remarkable
 occasions, even under the Roman commonwealth; and the bloody axe,
 to terrify the citizen from his crimes, and to repel the casual
 and temporary irruptions of vice, was repeatedly committed to the
 arbitrary will of the dictator. They were finally established on
 the ruins of the republic itself, when either the people became
 too corrupted for freedom, or when the magistrate became too
 corrupted to resign his dictatorial power. This species of
 government comes naturally in the termination of a continued and
 growing corruption; but has no doubt, in some instances, come too
 soon, and has sacrificed remains of virtue, that deserved a
 better fate, to the jealousy of tyrants, who were in haste to
 augment their power. This method of government cannot, in such
 cases, fail to introduce that measure of corruption, against
 whose external effects it is desired as a remedy. When fear is
 suggested as the only motive to duty, every heart becomes
 rapacious or base. And this medicine, if applied to a healthy
 body, is sure to create the distemper it is destined to cure.
     This is the manner of government into which the covetous, and
 the arrogant, to satiate their unhappy desires, would hurry their
 fellow-creatures: it is a manner of government to which the
 timorous and the servile submit at discretion; and when these
 characters of the rapacious and the timid divide mankind, even
 the virtues of Antoninus or Trajan, can do no more than apply,
 with candour and with vigour, the whip and the sword; and
 endeavour, by the hopes of reward, or the fear of punishment, to
 find a speedy and a temporary cure for the crimes, or the
 imbecilities of men.
     Other states may be more or less corrupted: this has
 corruption for its basis. Here justice may sometimes direct the
 arm of the despotical sovereign; but the name of justice is most
 commonly employed to signify the interest, or the caprice, of a
 reigning power. Human society, susceptible of such a variety of
 forms, here finds the simplest of all. The toils and possessions
 of many are destined to asswage the passions of one or a few; and
 the only parties that remain among mankind, are the oppressor who
 demands, and the oppressed who dare not refuse.
     Nations, while they were intitled to a milder fate, as in the
 case of the Greeks, repeatedly conquered, have been reduced to
 this condition by military force. They have reached it too in the
 maturity of their own depravations; when, like the Romans,
 returned from the conquest, and loaded with the spoils, of the
 world, they gave loose to faction, and to crimes too bold and too
 frequent for the correction of ordinary government; and when the
 sword of justice, dropping with blood, and perpetually required
 to suppress accumulating disorders on every side, could no longer
 await the delays and precautions of an administration fettered by
 laws.
     It is, however, well known from the history of mankind, that
 corruption of this, or of any other degree, is not peculiar to
 nations in their decline, or in the result of signal prosperity,
 and great advances in the arts of commerce. 'The bands of
 society, indeed, in small and infant establishments, are
 generally strong; and their subjects, either by an ardent
 devotion to their own tribe, or a vehement animosity against
 enemies, and by a vigorous courage founded on both, are well
 qualified to urge, or to sustain, the fortune of a growing
 community. But the savage, and the barbarian, have given,
 notwithstanding, in the case of entire nations, some examples of
 a weak and timorous character.(1*) They have, in more instances,
 fallen into that species of corruption which we have already
 described in treating of barbarous nations; they have made rapine
 their trade, not merely as a species of warfare, or with a view
 to enrich their community, but to possess, in property, what they
 learned to prefer even to the ties of affection or of blood.
     In the lowest state of commercial arts, the passions for
 wealth, and for dominion, have exhibited scenes of oppression, or
 servility, which the most finished corruption of the arrogant,
 the cowardly, and the mercenary, founded on the desire of
 procuring, or the fear of losing, a fortune, could not exceed. In
 such cases, the vices of men, unrestrained by forms, and unawed
 by police, are suffered to riot at large, and to produce their
 entire effects. Parties accordingly unite, or separate, on the
 maxims of a gang of robbers; they sacrifice to interest the
 tenderest affections of human nature. The parent supplies the
 market for slaves, even by the sale of his own children; the
 cottage ceases to be a sanctuary for the weak and the defenceless
 stranger; and rites of hospitality, often so sacred among nations
 in their primitive state, come to be violated, like every other
 tie of humanity, without fear or remorse.(2*)
     Nations, which in later periods of their history became
 eminent for civil wisdom and justice, had, perhaps, in a former
 age, paroxysms of lawless disorder, to which this description
 might in part be applied. The very policy by which they arrived
 at their degree of national felicity, was devised as a remedy for
 outrageous abuse. The establishment of order was dated from the
 commission of rapes and murders; indignation, and private
 revenge, were the principles on which nations proceeded to the
 expulsion of tyrants, to the emancipation of mankind, and the
 full explanation of their political rights.
     Defects of government, and of law, may be in some cases
 considered as a symptom of innocence and of virtue. But where
 power is already established, where the strong are unwilling to
 suffer restraint, or the weak unable to find a protection, the
 defects of law are marks of the most perfect corruption.
     Among rude nations, government is often defective; both
 because men are not yet acquainted with all the evils for which
 polished nations have endeavoured to find a redress; and because,
 even where evils of the most flagrant nature have long afflicted
 the peace of society, they have not yet been able to apply the
 cure. In the progress of civilization, new distempers break
 forth, and new remedies are applied: but the remedy is not always
 applied the moment the distemper appears; and laws, though
 suggested by the commission of crimes, are not the symptom of a
 recent corruption, but of a desire to find a remedy that may
 cure, perhaps, some inveterate evil which has long afflicted the
 state.
     There are corruptions, however, under which men still possess
 the vigour and the resolution to correct themselves. Such are the
 violence and the outrage which accompany the collision of fierce
 and daring spirits, occupied in the struggles which sometimes
 precede the dawn of civil and commercial improvements. In such
 cases, men have frequently discovered a remedy for evils, of
 which their own misguided impetuosity, and superior force of
 mind, were the principal causes. But if to a depraved
 disposition, we suppose to be joined a weakness of spirit; if to
 an admiration, and desire of riches, be joined an aversion to
 danger or business; if those orders of men whose valour is
 required by the public, cease to be brave; if the members of
 society, in general, have not those personal qualities which are
 required to fill the stations of equality, or of honour, to which
 they are invited by the forms of the state; they must sink to a
 depth from which their imbecility, even more than their depraved
 inclinations, may prevent their rise.
 
 
 Section II.
 
 Of Luxury
 
     We are far from being agreed on the application of the term
 luxury, or on that degree of its meaning which is consistent with
 national prosperity, or with the moral rectitude of our nature.
 It is sometimes employed to signify a manner of life which we
 think necessary to civilization, and even to happiness. It is, in
 our panegyric of polished ages, the parent of arts, the support
 of commerce, and the minister of national greatness, and of
 opulence. It is, in our censure of degenerate manners, the source
 of corruption, and the presage of national declension and ruin.
 It is admired, and it is blamed; it is treated as ornamental and
 useful; and it is proscribed as a vice.
     With all this diversity in our judgements, we are generally
 uniform in employing the term to signify that complicated
 apparatus which mankind devise for the ease and convenience of
 life. Their buildings, furniture, equipage, cloathing, train of
 domestics, refinement of the table, and, in general, all that
 assemblage which is rather intended to please the fancy, than to
 obviate real wants, and which is rather ornamental than useful.
     When we are disposed, therefore, under the appellation of
 luxury, to rank the enjoyment of these things among the vices, we
 either tacitly refer to the habits of sensuality, debauchery,
 prodigality, vanity, and arrogance, with which the possession of
 high fortune is sometimes attended; or we apprehend a certain
 measure of what is necessary to human life, beyond which all
 enjoyments are supposed to be excessive and vicious. When, on the
 contrary, luxury is made an article of national lustre and
 felicity, we only think of it as an innocent consequence of the
 unequal distribution of wealth, and as a method by which
 different ranks are rendered mutually dependent, and mutually
 useful. The poor are made to practise arts, and the rich to
 reward them. The public itself is made a gainer by what seems to
 waste its stock, and it receives a perpetual increase of wealth,
 from the influence of those growing appetites, and delicate
 tastes, which seem to menace consumption and ruin.
     It is certain, that we must either, together with the
 commercial arts, suffer their fruits to be enjoyed, and even, in
 some measure, admired; or, like the Spartans, prohibit the art
 itself, while we are afraid of its consequences, or while we
 think that the conveniencies it brings exceed what nature
 requires.
     We may propose to stop the advancement of arts at any stage
 of their progress, and still incur the Censure of luxury from
 those who have not advanced so far. The house-builder and the
 carpenter at Sparta were limited to the use of the axe and the
 saw; but a Spartan cottage might have passed for a palace in
 Thrace: and if the dispute were to turn on the knowledge of what
 is physically necessary to the preservation of human life, as the
 standard of what is morally lawful, the faculties of physic, as
 well as of morality, would probably divide on the subject, and
 leave every individual, as at present, to find some rule for
 himself. The casuist, for the most part, considers the practice
 of his own age and condition, as a standard for mankind. If in
 one age or condition, he condemn the use of a coach, in another
 be would have no less censured the wearing of shoes; and the very
 person who exclaims against the first, would probably not have
 spared the second, if it had not been already familiar in ages
 before his own. A censor born in a cottage, and accustomed to
 sleep upon straw, does not propose that men should return to the
 woods and the caves for shelter; he admits the reasonableness and
 the utility of what is already familiar; and apprehends an excess
 and corruption, only in the newest refinement of the rising
 generation.
     The clergy of Europe have preached successively against every
 new fashion, and every innovation in dress. The modes of youth
 are the subject of Censure to the old; and modes of the last age,
 in their turn, are matter of ridicule to the flippant, and the
 young. Of this there is not always a better account to be given,
 than that the old are disposed to be severe, and the young to be
 merry.
     The argument against many of the conveniences of life, drawn
 from the mere consideration of their not being necessary, was
 equally proper in the mouth of the savage, who dissuaded from the
 first applications of industry, as it is in that of the moralist,
 who insists on the vanity of the last. 'Our ancestors,' he might
 say, 'found their dwelling under this rock; they gathered their
 food in the forest; they allayed their thirst from the fountain;
 and they were clothed in the spoils of the beast they had slain.
 Why should we indulge a false delicacy, or require from the earth
 fruits which she is not accustomed to yield ? The bow of our
 fathers is already too strong for our arms; and the wild beast
 begins to lord it in the woods.'
     Thus the moralist may have found, in the proceedings of every
 age, those topics of blame, from which he is so much disposed to
 arraign the manners of his own; and our imbarrassment on the
 subject, is, perhaps, but a part of that general perplexity which
 we undergo, in trying to define moral characters by external
 circumstances, which may, or may not, be attended with faults in
 the mind and the heart. One man finds a vice in the wearing of
 linen; another does not, unless the fabric be fine: and if,
 mean-time, it be true, that a person may be dressed in
 manufacture, either coarse or fine; that he may sleep in the
 fields, or lodge in a palace; tread upon carpet, or plant his
 foot on the ground; while the mind either retains, or has lost,
 its penetration, and its vigour, and the heart its affection to
 mankind, it is vain, under any such circumstance, to seek for the
 distinctions of virtue and vice, or to tax the polished citizen
 with weakness for any part of his equipage, or for his wearing a
 fur, perhaps, in which some savage was dressed before him. Vanity
 is not distinguished by any peculiar species of dress. It is
 betrayed by the Indian in the phantastic assortments of his
 plumes, his shells, his party-coloured furs, and in the time he
 bestows at the glass and the toilet. Its projects in the woods
 and in the town are the same: in the one, it seeks, with the
 visage bedaubed, and with teeth artificially stained, for that
 admiration, which it courts in the other with a gilded equipage,
 and liveries of state.
     Polished nations, in their progress, often come to surpass
 the rude in moderation, and severity of manners. 'The Greeks,'
 says Thucydides, 'not long ago, like barbarians, wore golden
 spangles in the hair, and went armed in times of peace.'
 Simplicity of dress in this people, became a mark of politeness:
 and the mere materials with which the body is nourished or
 clothed, are probably of little consequence to any people. We
 must look for the characters of men in the qualities of the mind,
 not in the species of their food, or in the mode of their
 apparel. What are now the ornaments of the grave, and severe;
 what is owned to be a real conveniency, were once the fopperies
 of youth, or were devised to please the effeminate. The new
 fashion, indeed, is often the mark of the coxcomb; but we
 frequently change our fashions, without increasing the measures
 of our vanity or folly.
     Are the apprehensions of the severe, therefore, in every age,
 equally groundless and unreasonable? Are we never to dread any
 error in the article of a refinement bestowed on the means of
 subsistence, or the conveniencies of life? The fact is, that men
 are perpetually exposed to the commission of error in this
 article, not merely where they are accustomed to high measures of
 accommodation, or to any particular species of food, but
 where-ever these objects, in general, may come to be preferred to
 friends, to a country, or to mankind; they actually commit such
 error, where-ever they admire paultry distinctions or frivolous
 advantages; where-ever they shrink from small inconveniencies,
 and are incapable of discharging their duty with vigour. The use
 of morality on this subject, is not to limit men to any
 particular species of lodging, diet, or cloaths; but to prevent
 their considering these conveniencies as the principal objects of
 human life. And if we are asked, Where the pursuit of trifling
 accommodations should stop, in order that a man may devote
 himself entirely to the higher engagements of life? we may
 answer, That it should stop where it is. This was the rule
 followed at Sparta: The object of the rule was, to preserve the
 heart entire for the public, and to occupy men in cultivating
 their own nature, not in accumulating wealth, and external
 conveniencies. It was not expected otherwise, that the axe or the
 saw should be attended with greater political advantage, than the
 plane and the chisel. When Cato walked the streets of Rome
 without his robe, and without shoes, he did so, most probably, in
 contempt of what his countrymen were so prone to admire; not in
 hopes of finding a virtue in one species of dress, or a vice in
 another.
     Luxury, therefore, considered as a predilection in favour of
 the objects of vanity, and the costly materials of pleasure, is
 ruinous to the human character; considered as the mere use of
 accommodations and conveniencies which the age has procured,
 rather depends on the progress which the mechanical arts have
 made, and on the degree in which the fortunes of men are
 unequally parcelled, than on the dispositions of particular men
 either to vice or to virtue.
     Different measures of luxury are, however, variously suited
 to different constitutions of government. The advancement of arts
 supposes an unequal distribution of fortune; and the means of
 distinction they bring, serve to render the separation of ranks
 more sensible. Luxury is, upon this account, apart from all its
 moral effects, adverse to the form of democratical government;
 and in any state of society, can be safely admitted in that
 degree only in which the members of the community are supposed of
 unequal rank, and constitute public order by means of a regular
 subordination. High degrees of it appear salutary, and even
 necessary, in monarchical and mixed governments; where, besides
 the encouragement to arts and commerce, it serves to give lustre
 to those hereditary or constitutional dignities which have a
 place of importance in the political system. Whether even here
 luxury leads to abuse peculiar to ages of high refinement and
 opulence, we shall proceed to consider in the following sections.
 
 
 Section III.
 
 Of the Corruption incident to Polished Nations.
 
     Luxury and corruption are frequently coupled together, and
 even pass for synonymous terms. But in order to avoid any dispute
 about words, by the first we may understand that accumulation of
 wealth, and that refinement On the ways of enjoying it, which are
 the objects of industry, or the fruits of mechanic and commercial
 arts: And by the second a real weakness, or depravity of the
 human character, which may accompany any state of those arts, and
 be found under any external circumstances or condition
 whatsoever. It remains to inquire, What are the corruptions
 incident to polished nations, arrived at certain measures of
 luxury, and possessed of certain advantages, in which they are
 generally supposed to excel?
     We need not have recourse to a parallel between the manners
 of entire nations, in the extremes of civilization and rudeness,
 in order to be satisfied, that the vices of men are not
 proportioned to their fortunes; or that the habits of avarice, or
 of sensuality, are not founded on any certain measures of wealth,
 or determinate kind of enjoyment. Where the situations of
 particular men are varied as much by their personal stations, as
 they can be by the state of national refinements, the same
 passions for interest, or pleasure, prevail in every condition.
 They arise from temperament, or an acquired admiration of
 property; not from any particular manner of life in which the
 parties are engaged, nor from any particular species of property,
 which may have occupied their cares and their wishes.
     Temperance and moderation are, at least, as frequent among
 those whom we call the superior, as they are among the lower
 classes of men; and however we may affix the character of
 sobriety to mere cheapness of diet, and other accommodations with
 which any particular age, or rank of men, appear to be contented,
 it is well known, that costly materials are not necessary to
 constitute a debauch, nor profligacy less frequent under the
 thatched roof, than under the lofty ceiling. Men grow equally
 familiar with different conditions, receive equal pleasure, and
 are equally allured to sensuality, in the palace, and in the
 cave. Their acquiring in either habits of intemperance or sloth,
 depends on the remission of other pursuits, and on the distaste
 of the mind to other engagements. If the affections of the heart
 be awake, and the passions of love, admiration, or anger, be
 kindled, the costly furniture of the palace, as well as the
 homely accommodations of the cottage, are neglected: and men,
 when roused, reject their repose; or, when wearied, embrace it
 alike on the silken bed, or on the couch of straw.
     We are not, however, from hence to conclude, that luxury,
 with all its concomitant circumstances, which either serve to
 favour its increase, or which, in the arrangements of civil
 society, follow it as consequences, can have no effect to the
 disadvantage of national manners. If that respite from public
 dangers and troubles which gives a leisure for the practice of
 commercial arts, be continued, or increased, into a disuse of
 national efforts; if the individual, not called to unite with his
 country, be left to pursue his private advantage; we may find him
 become effeminate, mercenary, and sensual; not because pleasures
 and profits are become more alluring, but because he has fewer
 calls to attend to other objects; and because he has more
 encouragement to study his personal advantages, and pursue his
 separate interests.
     If the disparities of rank and fortune which are necessary to
 the pursuit or enjoyment of luxury, introduce false grounds of
 precedency and estimation; if, on the mere considerations of
 being rich or poor, one order of men are, in their own
 apprehension, elevated, another debased; if one be criminally
 proud, another meanly dejected; and every rank in its place, like
 the tyrant, who thinks that nations are made for himself, be
 disposed to assume on the rights of mankind: although, upon the
 comparison, the higher order may be least corrupted; or from
 education, and a sense of personal dignity, have most good
 qualities remaining; yet the one becoming mercenary and servile;
 the other imperious and arrogant; both regardless of justice, and
 of merit; the whole mass is corrupted, and the manners of a
 society changed for the worse, in proportion as its members cease
 to act on principles of equality, independence, or freedom.
     Upon this view, and considering the merits of men in the
 abstract, a mere change from the habits of a republic to those of
 a monarchy; £rom the love of equality, to the sense of a
 subordination founded on birth, titles, and fortune, is a species
 of corruption to mankind. But this degree of corruption is still
 consistent with the safety and prosperity of some nations; it
 admits of a vigorous courage, by which the rights of individuals,
 and of kingdoms, may be long preserved.
     Under the form of monarchy. while yet in its vigour, superior
 fortune is, indeed, one mark by which the different orders of men
 are distinguished; but there are some other ingredients, without
 which wealth is not admitted as a foundation of precedency, and
 in favour of which it is often despised, and lavished away. Such
 are birth and titles, the reputation of courage, courtly manners,
 and a certain elevation of mind. If we suppose, that these
 distinctions are forgotten, and nobility itself only to be known
 by the sumptuous retinue which money alone may procure; and by a
 lavish expence, which the more recent fortunes can generally best
 sustain; luxury must then be allowed to corrupt the monarchical
 as much as the republican state, and to introduce a fatal
 dissolution of manners, under which men of every condition,
 although they are eager to acquire, or to display their wealth,
 have no remains of real ambition. They have neither the elevation
 of nobles, nor the fidelity of subjects; they have changed into
 effeminate vanity, that sense of honour which gave rules to the
 personal courage; and into a servile baseness, that loyalty,
 which bound each in his place, to his immediate superior, and the
 whole to the throne.
     Nations are most exposed to corruption from this quarter,
 when the mechanical arts, being greatly advanced, furnish
 numberless articles, to be applied in ornament to the person, in
 furniture, entertainment, or equipage; when such articles as the
 rich alone can procure are admired; and when consideration,
 precedence, and rank, are accordingly made to depend on fortune.
     In a more rude state of the arts, although wealth be
 unequally divided, the opulent can amass only the simple means of
 subsistence: They can only fill the granary, and furnish the
 stall; reap from more extended fields, and drive their herds over
 a larger pasture. To enjoy their magnificence, they must live in
 a croud; and to secure their possessions, they must be surrounded
 with friends that espouse their quarrels. Their honours, as well
 as their safety, consist in the numbers who attend them; and
 their personal distinctions are taken from their liberality, and
 supposed elevation of mind. In this manner, the possession of
 riches serves only to make the owner assume a character of
 magnanimity, to become the guardian of numbers, or the public
 object of respect and affection. But when the bulky constituents
 of wealth, and of rustic magnificence, can be exchanged for
 refinements; and when the produce of the soil may be turned into
 equipage, and mere decoration; when the combination of many is no
 longer required for personal safety; the master may become the
 sole consumer of his own estate: he may refer the use of every
 subject to himself; he may employ the materials of generosity to
 feed a personal vanity, or to indulge a sickly and effeminate
 fancy, which has learned to enumerate the trappings of weakness
 or folly among the necessaries of life.
     The Persian satrape, we are told, when he saw the King of
 Sparta at the place of their conference, stretched on the grass
 with his soldiers, blushed at the provision he had made for the
 accommodation of his own person: he ordered the furs and the
 carpets to be withdrawn; he felt his own inferiority; and
 recollected, that he was to treat with a man, not to vie with a
 pageant in costly attire and magnificence.
     When, amidst circumstances that make no trial of the virtues
 or talents of men, we have been accustomed to the air of
 superiority, which people of fortune derive from their retinue,
 we are apt to lose every sense of distinction arising from merit,
 or even from abilities. We rate our fellow-citizens by the figure
 they are able to make; by their buildings, their dress, their
 equipage, and the train of their followers. All these
 circumstances make a part in our estimate of what is excellent;
 and if the master himself is known to be a pageant in the midst
 of his fortune, we nevertheless pay our court to his station, and
 look up with an envious, servile, or dejected mind, to what is,
 in itself, scarcely fit to amuse children; though, when it is
 worn as a badge of distinction, it inflames the ambition of those
 we call the great, and strikes the multitude with awe and
 respect.
     We judge of entire nations by the productions of a few
 mechanical arts, and think we are talking of men, while we are
 boasting of their estates, their dress, and their palaces. The
 sense in which we apply the terms, great, and noble, high rank,
 and high life, shew, that we have, on such occasions, transferred
 the idea of perfection from the character to the equipage; and
 that excellence itself is, in our esteem, a mere pageant, adorned
 at a great expence, by the labours of many workmen.
     To those who overlook the subtile transitions of the
 imagination, it might appear, since wealth can do no more than
 furnish the means of subsistence, and purchase animal pleasures,
 that covetousness, and venality itself, should keep pace with our
 fears of want, or with our appetite for sensual enjoyments; and
 that where the appetite is satiated, and the fear of want is
 removed, the mind should be at ease on the subject of fortune.
 But they are not the mere pleasures that riches procure, nor the
 choice of viands which cover the board of the wealthy, that
 inflame the passions of the covetous and the mercenary. Nature is
 easily satisfied in all her enjoyments. It is an opinion of
 eminence, connected with fortune; it is a sense of debasement
 attending on poverty, which renders us blind to every advantage,
 but that of the rich; and insensible to every disgrace, but that
 of the poor. It is this unhappy apprehension, that occasionally
 prepares us for the desertion of every duty, for a submission to
 every indignity, and for the commission of every crime that can
 be accomplished in safety.
     Aurengzebe was not more renowned for sobriety in his private
 station, and in the conduct of a supposed dissimulation, by which
 he aspired to sovereign power, than he continued to be, even on
 the throne of Indostan. Simple, abstinent, and severe in his
 diet, and other pleasures, he still led the life of a hermit, and
 occupied his time with a seemingly painful application to the
 affairs of a great empire.(3*) He quitted a station in which, if
 pleasure had been his object, he might have indulged his
 sensuality without reserve; he made his way to a scene of
 disquietude and care; he aimed at the summit of human greatness,
 in the possession of imperial fortune, not at the gratifications
 of animal appetite, or the enjoyment of ease. Superior to sensual
 pleasure, as well as to the feelings of nature, he dethroned his
 father, and he murdered his brothers, that he might roll on a
 carriage incrusted with diamond and pearl; that his elephants,
 his camels, and his horses, on the march, might form a line
 extending many leagues; might present a glittering harness to the
 sun; and loaded with treasure, usher to the view of an abject and
 admiring croud, that awful majesty, in whose presence they were
 to strike the forehead on the ground, and be overwhelmed with the
 sense of his greatness, and with that of their own debasement.
     As these are the objects which prompt the desire of dominion,
 and excite the ambitious to aim at the mastery of their
 fellow-creatures; so they inspire the ordinary race of men with a
 sense of infirmity and meanness, that prepares them to suffer
 indignities, and to become the property of persons, whom they
 consider as of a rank and a nature so much superior to their own.
     The chains of perpetual slavery, accordingly, appear to be
 rivetted in the East, no less by the pageantry which is made to
 accompany the possession of power, than they are by the fears of
 the sword, and the terrors of a military execution. In the West,
 as well as the East, we are willing to bow to the splendid
 equipage, and stand at an awful distance from the pomp of a
 princely estate. We too, may be terrified by the frowns, or won
 by the smiles, of those whose favour is riches and honour, and
 whose displeasure is poverty and neglect. We too may overlook the
 honours of the human soul, from an admiration of the pageantries
 that accompany fortune. The procession of elephants harnessed
 with gold might dazzle into slaves, the people who derive
 corruption and weakness from the effect of their own arts and
 contrivances, as well as those who inherit servility from their
 ancestors, and are enfeebled by their natural temperament, and
 the enervating charms of their soil, and their climate.
     It appears, therefore, that although the mere use of
 materials which constitute luxury, may be distinguished from
 actual vice; yet nations under a high state of the commercial
 arts, are exposed to corruption, by their admitting wealth,
 unsupported by personal elevation and virtue, as the great
 foundation of distinction, and by having their attention turned
 on the side of interest, as the road to consideration and honour.
     With this effect, luxury may serve to corrupt democratical
 states, by introducing a species of monarchical subordination,
 without that sense of high birth and hereditary honours which
 render the boundaries of rank fixed and determinate, and which
 teach men to act in their stations with force and propriety. It
 may prove the occasion of political corruption, even in
 monarchical governments, by drawing respect towards mere wealth;
 by casting a shade on the lustre of personal qualities, or
 family-distinctions; and by infecting all orders of men, with
 equal venality, servility, and cowardice.
 
 
 Section IV.
 
 The same subject continued
 
     The increasing regard with which men appear, in the progress
 of commercial arts, to study their profit, or the delicacy with
 which they refine on their pleasures; even industry itself, or
 the habit of application to a tedious employment, in which no
 honours are won, may, perhaps, be considered as indications of a
 growing attention to interest, or of effeminacy, contracted in
 the enjoyment of ease and conveniency, Every successive art, by
 which the individual is taught to improve on his fortune, is, in
 reality, an addition to his private engagements, and a new
 avocation of his mind from the public.
     Corruption, however, does not arise from the abuse of
 commercial arts alone; it requires the aid of political
 situation; and is not produced by the objects that occuPy a
 sordid and a mercenary spirit, without the aid of circumstances
 that enable men to indulge in safety any mean disposition they
 have acquired.
     Providence has fitted mankind for the higher engagements
 which they are sometimes obliged to fulfil; and it is in the
 midst of such engagements that they are most likely to acquire or
 to preserve their virtues. The habits of a vigorous mind are
 formed in contending with difficulties, not in enjoying the
 repose of a pacific station; penetration and wisdom are the
 fruits of experience, not the lessons of retirement and leisure;
 ardour and generosity are the qualities of a mind roused and
 animated in the conduct of scenes that engage the heart, not the
 gifts of rejection or knowledge. The mere intermission of
 national and political efforts is, notwithstanding, sometimes
 mistaken for public good; and there is no mistake more likely to
 foster the vices, or to flatter the weakness, of feeble and
 interested men.
     If the ordinary arts of policy, or rather, if a growing
 indifference to objects of a public nature, should prevail, and,
 under any free constitution, put an end to those disputes of
 party, and silence that noise of dissension, which generally
 accompany the exercise of freedom, we may venture to
 prognosticate corruption to the national manners, as well as
 remissness to the national spirit. The period is come, when, no
 engagement remaining on the part of the public, private interest,
 and animal pleasure, become the sovereign objects of care. When
 men, being relieved from the pressure of great occasions, bestow
 their attention on trifles; and having carried what they are
 pleased to call sensibility and delicacy, on the subject of ease
 or molestation, as far as real weakness or folly can go, have
 recourse to affectation, in order to enhance the pretended
 demands, and accumulate the anxieties, of a sickly fancy, and
 enfeebled mind.
     In this condition, mankind generally flatter their own
 imbecility under the name of politeness. They are persuaded, that
 the celebrated ardour, generosity, and fortitude, of former ages,
 bordered on frenzy, or were the mere effects of necessity, on men
 who had not the means of enjoying their ease, or their pleasure.
 They congratulate themselves on having escaped the storm which
 required the exercise of such arduous virtues; and with that
 vanity which accompanies the human race in their meanest
 condition, they boast of a scene of affectation, of languor, or
 of folly, as the standard of human felicity, and as furnishing
 the properest exercise of a rational nature.
     It is none of the least menacing symptoms of an age prone to
 degeneracy, that the minds of men become perplexed in the
 discernment of merit, as much as the spirit becomes enfeebled in
 conduct, and the heart misled in the choice of its objects. The
 care of mere fortune is supposed to constitute wisdom; retirement
 from public affairs, and real indifference to mankind, receive
 the applauses of moderation and virtue.
     Great fortitude, and elevation of mind, have not always,
 indeed, been employed in the attainment of valuable ends; but
 they are always respectable, and they are always necessary when
 we would act for the good of mankind, in any of the more arduous
 stations of life. While, therefore, we blame their
 misapplication, we should beware of depreciating their value. Men
 of a severe and sententious morality have not always sufficiently
 observed this caution; nor have they been duly aware of the
 corruptions they flattered, by the satire they employed against
 what is aspiring and prominent in the character of the human
 soul.
     It might have been expected, that in an age of hopeless
 debasement,(4*) the talents of Demosthenes and Tully, even the
 ill-governed magnanimity of a Macedonian, or the daring
 enterprise of a Carthaginian leader, might have escaped the
 acrimony of a satirist, who had so many objects of correction in
 his view, and who possessed the arts of declamation in so high a
 degree:
 
                      I, demens, et saevos per Alpes,
                      Ut pueris placeas, et declamatio fias,
 
 is part of the illiberal censure which is thrown by this poet on
 the person and action of a leader, who, by his courage and
 conduct, in the very service to which the satire referred, had
 well nigh saved his country from the ruin with which it was at
 last overwhelmed.
 
                      Heroes are much the same, the point's
 agreed,
                      From Macedonia's madman to the Swede,
 
 is a distich, in which another poet of beautiful talents, has
 attempted to depreciate a name, to which, probably, few of his
 readers are found to aspire.
     If men must go wrong, there is a choice of their very errors,
 as well as of their virtues. Ambition, the love of personal
 eminence, and the desire of fame, although they sometimes lead to
 the commission of crimes, yet always engage men in pursuits that
 require to be supported by some of the greatest qualities of the
 human soul; and if eminence is the principal object of pursuit,
 there is, at least, a probability, that those qualities may be
 studied on which a real elevation of mind is raised. But when
 public alarms have ceased, and contempt of glory is recommended
 as an article of wisdom, the sordid habits, and mercenary
 dispositions, to which, under a general indifference to national
 objects, the members of a polished or commercial state are
 exposed, must prove at once the most effectual suppression of
 every liberal sentiment, and the most fatal reverse of all those
 principles from which communities derive their hopes of
 preservation, and their strength.
     It is noble to possess happiness and independence, either in
 retirement, or in public life. The characteristic of the happy,
 is to acquit themselves well in every condition; in the court, or
 in the village; in the senate, or in the private retreat. But if
 they affect any particular station, it is surely that in which
 their actions may be rendered most extensively useful. Our
 considering mere retirement, therefore, as a symptom of
 moderation, and of virtue, is either a remnant of that system,
 under which monks and anchorets, in former ages, have been
 canonized; or proceeds from a habit of thinking, which appears
 equally fraught with moral corruption, from our considering
 public life as a scene for the gratification of mere vanity,
 avarice, and ambition; never as furnishing the best opportunity
 for a just and a happy engagement of the mind and the heart.
     Emulation, and the desire of power, are but sorry motives to
 public conduct; but if they have been, in any case, the principal
 inducements from which men have taken part in the service of
 their country, any diminution of their prevalence or force is a
 real corruption of national manners; and the pretended moderation
 assumed by the higher orders of men, has a fatal effect in the
 state. The disinterested love of the public, is a principle
 without which some constitutions of government cannot subsist:
 but when we consider how seldom this has appeared a reigning
 passion, we have little reason to impute the prosperity of
 preservation of nations, in every case, to its influence.
     It is sufficient, perhaps, under one form of government, that
 men should be fond of their independence; that they should be
 ready to oppose usurpation, and to repel personal indignities:
 under another, it is sufficient, that they should be tenacious of
 their rank, and of their honours; and instead of a zeal for the
 public, entertain a vigilant jealousy of the rights which pertain
 to themselves. When numbers of men retain a certain degree of
 elevation and fortitude, they are qualified to give a mutual
 check to their several errors, and are able to act in that
 variety of situations which the different constitutions of
 government have prepared for their members: but, under the
 disadvantages of a feeble spirit, however directed, and however
 informed, no national constitution is safe; nor can any degree of
 enlargement to which a state has arrived, secure its political
 welfare.
     In states where property, distinction, and pleasure, are
 thrown out as baits to the imagination, and incentives to
 passion, the public seems to rely for the preservation of its
 political life, on the degree of emulation and jealousy with
 which parties mutually oppose and restrain each other. The
 desires of preferment and profit in the breast of the citizen,
 are the motives from which he is excited to enter on public
 affairs, and are the considerations which direct his political
 conduct. The suppression, therefore, of ambition, of
 party-animosity, and of public envy, is probably, in every such
 case, not a reformation, but a symptom of weakness, and a prelude
 to more sordid pursuits, and ruinous amusements.
     On the eve of such a revolution in manners, the higher ranks,
 in every mixed or monarchical government, have need to take in
 the care of themselves. Men of business, and of industry,
 inferior stations of life, retain their occupations, and are
 secured, by a kind of necessity, in the possession of those
 habits on which they rely for their quiet, and for the moderate
 enjoyments of life. But the higher orders of men, if they
 relinquish the state, if they cease to possess that courage and
 elevation of mind, and to exercise those talents which are
 employed in its defence, and its government, are, in reality, by
 the seeming advantages of their station, become the refuse of
 that society of which they once were the ornament; and from being
 the most respectable, and the most happy, of its members, are
 become the most wretched and corrupt. In their approach to this
 condition, and in the absence of every manly occupation, they
 feel a dissatisfaction and languor which they cannot explain:
 They pine in the midst of apparent enjoyments; or, by the variety
 and caprice of their different pursuits and amusements, exhibit a
 state of agitation, which, like the disquiet of sickness, is not
 a proof of enjoyment or pleasure, but of suffering and pain. The
 care of his buildings, his equipage, or his table, is chosen by
 one; literary amusement, or some frivolous study, by another. The
 sports of the country, and the diversions of the town; the
 gaming-table,(5*) dogs, horses, and wine, are employed to fill up
 the blank of a listless and unprofitable life. They speak of
 human pursuits, as if the whole difficulty were to find something
 to do. They fix on some frivolous occupation, as if there was
 nothing that deserved to be done: They consider what tends to the
 good of their fellow-creatures, as a disadvantage to themselves:
 They fly from every scene, in which any efforts of vigour are
 required, or in which they might be allured to perform any
 service to their country. We misapply our compassion in pitying
 the poor; it were much more justly applied to the rich, who
 become the first victims of that wretched insignificance, into
 which the members of every corrupted state, by the tendency of
 their weaknesses, and their vices, are in haste to plunge
 themselves.
     It is in this condition, that the sensual invent all those
 refinements on pleasure, and devise those incentives to a
 satiated appetite, which tend to foster the corruptions of a
 dissolute age. The effects of brutal appetite, and the mere
 debauch, are more flagrant, and more violent, perhaps, in rude
 ages, than they are in the later periods of commerce and luxury:
 but that perpetual habit of searching for animal pleasure where
 it is not to be found, in the gratifications of an appetite that
 is cloyed, and among the ruins of an animal constitution, is not
 more fatal to the virtues of the soul, than it is even to the
 enjoyment of sloth, or of pleasure; it is not a more certain
 avocation from public affairs, or a surer prelude to national
 decay, than it is a disappointment to our hopes of private
 felicity.
     In these reflections, it has been the object, not to
 ascertain a precise measure to which corruption has risen in any
 of the nations that have attained to eminence, or that have gone
 to decay; but to describe that remissness of spirit, that
 weakness of soul, that state of national debility, which is
 likely to end in political slavery; an evil which remains to be
 considered as the last object of caution, and beyond which there
 is no subject of disquisition in the perishing fortunes of
 nations.
 
 Section V.
 
 Of Corruption, as it tends to Political Slavery.
 
     Liberty, in one sense, appears to be the portion of polished
 nations alone. The savage is personally free, because he lives
 unrestrained, and acts with the members of his tribe on terms of
 equality. The barbarian is frequently independent from a
 continuance of the same circumstances, or because he has courage
 and a sword. But good policy alone can provide for the regular
 administration of justice, or constitute a force in the state,
 which is ready on every occasion to defend the rights of its
 members.
     It has been found, that, except in a few singular cases, the
 commercial and political arts have advanced together. These arts
 have been in modern Europe so interwoven, that we cannot
 determine which were prior in the order of time, or derived most
 advantage from the mutual influences with which they act and
 re-act upon one another. It has been observed, that in some
 nations the spirit of commerce, intent on securing its profits,
 has led the way to political wisdom. A people, possessed of
 wealth, and become jealous of their properties, have formed the
 project of emancipation, and have proceeded, under favour of an
 importance recently gained, still farther to enlarge their
 pretensions, and to dispute the prerogatives which their
 sovereign had been in use to employ. But it is in vain that we
 expect in one age, from the possession of wealth, the fruit which
 it is said to have borne in a former. Great accessions of
 fortune, when recent, when accompanied with frugality, and a
 sense of independence, may render the owner confident in his
 strength, and ready to spurn at oppression. The purse which is
 open, not to personal expence, or to the indulgence of vanity,
 but to support the interests of a faction, to gratify the higher
 passions of party, render the wealthy citizen formidable to those
 who pretend to dominion; but it does not follow, that in a time
 of corruption, equal, or greater, measures of wealth should
 operate to the same effect.
     On the contrary, when wealth is accumulated only in the hands
 of the miser, and runs to waste from those of the prodigal; when
 heirs of family find themselves straitened and poor, in the midst
 of affluence; when the cravings of luxury silence even the voice
 of party and faction; when the hopes of meriting the rewards of
 compliance, Or the fear of losing what is held at discretion,
 keep men in a state of suspense and anxiety; when fortune, in
 short, instead of being considered as the instrument of a
 vigorous spirit, becomes the idol of a covetous or a profuse, of
 a rapacious or a timorous mind; the foundation on which freedom
 was built, may serve to support a tyranny; and what, in one age,
 raised the pretensions, and fostered the confidence of the
 subject, may, in another, incline him to servility, and furnish
 the price to be paid for his prostitutions. Even those, who, in a
 vigorous age, gave the example of wealth, in the hands of the
 people, becoming an occasion of freedom, may, in times of
 degeneracy, verify likewise the maxim of Tacitus, That the
 admiration of riches leads to despotical government.(6*)
     Men who have tasted of freedom, and who have felt their
 personal rights, are not easily taught to bear with incroachments
 on either, and cannot, without some preparation, come to submit
 to oppression. They may receive this unhappy preparation, under
 different forms of government, from different hands, and arrive
 at the same end by different ways. They follow one direction in
 republics, another in monarchies, and in mixed governments. But
 where-ever the state has, by means that do not preserve the
 virtue of the subject, effectually guarded his safety;
 remissness, and neglect of the public, are likely to follow; and
 polished nations of every description, appear to encounter a
 danger, on this quarter, proportioned to the degree in which they
 have, during any continuance, enjoyed the uninterrupted
 possession of peace and prosperity.
     Liberty results, we say, from the government of laws; and we
 are apt to consider statutes, not merely as the resolutions and
 maxims of a people determined to be free, not as the writings by
 which their rights are kept on record; but as a power erected to
 guard them, and as a barrier which the caprice of man cannot
 transgress.
     When a basha, in Asia, pretends to decide every controversy
 by the rules of natural equity, we allow that he is possessed of
 discretionary powers. When a judge in Europe is left to decide,
 according to his own interpretation of written laws, is he in any
 sense more restrained than the former? Have the multiplied words
 of a statute an influence over the conscience, and the heart,
 more powerful than that of reason and nature? Does the party, in
 any judicial proceeding, enjoy a less degree of safety, when his
 rights are discussed, on the foundation of a rule that is open to
 the understandings of mankind, than when they are referred to an
 intricate system, which it has become the object of a separate
 profession to study and to explain?
     If forms of proceeding, written statutes, or other
 constituents of law, cease to be enforced by the very spirit from
 which they arose; they serve only to cover, not to restrain, the
 iniquities of power: they are possibly respected even by the
 corrupt magistrate, when they favour his purpose; but they are
 contemned or evaded, when they stand in his way: And the
 influence of laws, where they have any real effect in the
 preservation of liberty, is not any magic power descending from
 shelves that are loaded with books, but is, in reality, the
 influence of men resolved to be free; of men, who, having
 adjusted in writing the terms On which they are to live with the
 state, and with their fellow-subjects, are determined, by their
 vigilance and spirit, to make these terms be observed.
     We are taught, under every form of government, to apprehend
 usurpations, from the abuse, or from the extension of the
 executive power. In pure monarchies, this power is commonly
 hereditary, and made to descend in a determinate line. In
 elective monarchies, it is held for life. In republics, it is
 exercised during a limited time. Where men, or families, are
 called by election to the possession of temporary dignities, it
 is more the object of ambition to perpetuate, than to extend
 their powers. In hereditary monarchies, the sovereignty is
 already perpetual; and the aim of every ambitious prince, is to
 enlarge his prerogative. Republics, and, in times of commotion,
 communities of every form, are exposed to hazard, not from those
 only who are formally raised to places of trust, but from every
 person whatever, who is incited by ambition, and who is supported
 by faction.
     It is no advantage to a prince, or other magistrate, to enjoy
 more power than is consistent with the good of mankind; nor is it
 of any benefit to a man to be unjust: but these maxims are a
 feeble security against the passions and follies of men. Those
 who are intrusted with any measures of influence, are disposed,
 from a mere aversion to constraint, to remove opposition. Not
 only the monarch who wears a hereditary crown, but the magistrate
 who holds his office for a limited time, grows fond of his
 dignity. The very minister, who depends for his place on the
 momentary will of his prince, and whose personal interests are,
 in every respect, those of a subject, still has the weakness to
 take an interest in the growth of prerogative, and to reckon as
 gain to himself the incroachments he has made on the rights of a
 people, with whom he himself and his family are soon to be
 numbered.
     Even with the best intentions towards mankind, we are
 inclined to think, that their welfare depends, not on the
 felicity of their own inclinations, or the happy employment of
 their own talents, but on their ready compliance with what we
 have devised for their good. Accordingly, the greatest virtue of
 which any sovereign has hitherto shown an example, is not a
 desire of cherishing in his people the spirit of freedom and
 independence; but what is in itself sufficiently rare, and highly
 meritorious, a steady regard to the distribution of justice in
 matters of property, a disposition to protect and to oblige, to
 redress the grievances, and to promote the interest of his
 subjects. It was from a reference to these objects, that Titus
 computed the value of his time, and judged of its application.
 But the sword, which in this beneficent hand was drawn to protect
 the subject, and to procure a speedy and effectual distribution
 of justice, was likewise sufficient in the hands of a tyrant, to
 shed the blood of the innocent, and to cancel the rights of men.
 The temporary proceedings of humanity, though they suspended the
 exercise of oppression, did not break the national chains: the
 prince was even the better enabled to procure that species of
 good which he studied; because there was no freedom remaining,
 and because there was no where a force to dispute his decrees, or
 to interrupt their execution.
     Was it in vain, that Antoninus became acquainted with the
 characters of Thrasea, Helvidius, Cato, Dion, and Brutus? Was it
 in vain, that he learned to understand the form of a free
 community, raised on the basis of equality and justice; or of a
 monarchy, under which the liberties of the subject were held the
 most sacred object of administration?(7*) Did he mistake the
 means of procuring to mankind what he points out as a blessing?
 Or did the absolute power with which he was furnished, in a
 mighty empire, only disable him from executing what his mind had
 perceived as a national good? In such a case, it were vain to
 Hatter the monarch or his people. The first cannot bestow
 liberty, without raising a spirit, which may, on occasion, stand
 in opposition to his own designs; nor the latter receive this
 blessing, while they own that it is in the right of a master to
 give or to with-hold it. The claim of justice is firm and
 peremptory, We receive favours with a sense of obligation and
 kindness; but we would inforce our rights, and the spirit of
 freedom in this exertion cannot take the tone of supplication, or
 of thankfulness, without betraying itself. 'You have intreated
 Octavius,' says Brutus to Cicero, 'that he would spare those who
 stand foremost among the citizens of Rome. What if he will not?
 Must we perish? yes; rather than owe our safety to him.'
     Liberty is a right which every individual must be ready to
 vindicate for himself, and which he who pretends to bestow as a
 favour, has by that very act in reality denied. Even political
 establishments, though they appear to be independent of the will
 and arbitration of men, cannot be relied on for the preservation
 of freedom; they may nourish, but should not supersede that firm
 and resolute spirit, with which the liberal mind is always
 prepared to resist indignities, and to refer its safety to
 itself.
     Were a nation, therefore, given to be moulded by a sovereign,
 as the clay is put into the hands of the potter, this project of
 bestowing liberty on a people who are actually servile, is,
 perhaps, of all others, the most difficult, and requires most to
 be executed in silence, and with the deepest reserve. Men are
 qualified to receive this blessing, only in proportion as they
 are made to apprehend their own rights; and are made to respect
 the just pretensions of mankind; in proportion as they are
 willing to sustain, in their own persons, the burden of
 government, and of national defence; and are willing to prefer
 the engagements of a liberal mind, to the enjoyments of sloth, or
 the delusive hopes of a safety purchased by submission and fear.
     I speak with respect, and, if I may be allowed the
 expression, even with indulgence, to those who are intrusted with
 high prerogatives in the political system of nations. It is,
 indeed, seldom their fault that states are inslaved. What should
 be expected from them, but that being actuated by human desires,
 they should be averse to disappointment, or even to delay; and in
 the ardour with which they pursue their object, that they should
 break through the barriers that would stop their career? If
 millions recede before single men, and senates are passive, as if
 composed of members who had no opinion or sense of their own; on
 whose side have the defences of freedom given way, or to whom
 shall we impute their fall? to the subject, who has deserted his
 station; or to the sovereign, who has only remained in his own;
 and who, if the collateral or subordinate members of government
 shall cease to question his power, must continue to govern
 without any restraint?
     It is well known, that constitutions framed for the
 preservation of liberty, must consist of many parts; and that
 senates, popular assemblies, courts of justice, magistrates of
 different orders, must combine to balance each other, while they
 exercise, sustain, or check the executive power. If any part is
 struck out, the fabric must totter, or fall; if any member is
 remiss, the others must incroach. In assemblies constituted by
 men of different talents, habits, and apprehensions, it were
 something more than human that could make them agree in every
 point of importance; having different opinions and views, it were
 want of integrity to abstain from disputes: our very praise of
 unanimity, therefore, is to be considered as a danger to liberty.
 We wish for it, at the hazard of taking in its place, the
 remissness of men grown indifferent to the public; the venality
 of those who have sold the rights of their country; or the
 servility of others, who give implicit obedience to a leader by
 whom their minds are subdued. The love of the public, and respect
 to its laws, are the points in which mankind are bound to agree;
 but if, in matters of controversy, the sense of any individual or
 party is invariably pursued, the cause of freedom is already
 betrayed.
     He whose office it is to govern a supine or an abject people,
 cannot, for a moment, cease to extend his powers. Every execution
 of law, every movement of the state, every civil and military
 operation, in which his power is exerted, must serve to confirm
 his authority, and present him to the view of the public, as the
 sole object of consideration, fear, and respect. Those very
 establishments which were devised, in one age, to limit, or to
 direct the exercise of an executive power, will serve, in
 another, to settle its foundations, and to give it stability,
 they will point out the channels i n which it may run, without
 giving offence, or without exciting alarms, and the very councils
 which were instituted to check its incroachments, will, in a time
 of corruption, furnish an aid to its usurpations.
     The passion for independence, and the love of dominion,
 frequently arise from a common source: There is, in both, an
 aversion to controul; and he, who, in one situation, cannot bruik
 a superior, must, in another, dislike to be joined with an equal.
     What the prince, under a pure or limited monarchy, is, by the
 constitution of his country, the leader of a faction would
 willingly become in republican governments. If he attains to this
 envied condition, his own inclination, or the tendency of human
 affairs, seem to open before him the career of a royal ambition:
 but the circumstances in which he is destined to act, are very
 different from those of a king. He encounters with men who are
 unused to disparity; he is obliged, for his own security, to hold
 the dagger continually unsheathed. When he hopes to be safe, he
 possibly means to be just; but is hurried, from the first moment
 of his usurpation, into every exercise of despotical power. The
 heir of a crown has no such quarrel to maintain with his
 subjects: his situation is flattering; and the heart must be
 uncommonly bad, that does not glow with affection to a people,
 who are, at once, his admirers, his support, and the ornaments of
 his reign. In him, perhaps, there is no explicit design of
 trespassing on the rights of his subjects; but the forms intended
 to preserve their freedom, are not, on this account, always safe
 in his hands.
     Slavery has been imposed upon mankind in the wantonness of a
 depraved ambition, and tyrannical cruelties have been committed
 in the gloomy hours of jealousy and terror: yet these demons are
 not necessary to the creation, Or to the support of an arbitrary
 power. Although no policy was ever more successful than that of
 the Roman republic in maintaining a national fortune; yet
 subjects, as well as their princes, frequently imagine that
 freedom is a clog on the proceedings of government: they imagine,
 that despotical power is best fitted to procure dispatch and
 secrecy in the execution of public councils; to maintain what
 they are pleased to call political order (8*) and to give a
 speedy redress of complaints. They even sometimes acknowledge,
 that if a succession of good princes could be found, despotical
 government is best calculated for the happiness of mankind. While
 they reason thus, they cannot blame a sovereign who, in the
 confidence that he is to employ his power for good purposes,
 endeavours to extend its limits; and, in his own apprehension,
 strives only to shake off the restraints which stand in the way
 of reason, and which prevent the effect of his friendly
 intentions.
     Thus prepared for usurpation, let him, at the head of a free
 state, employ the force with which he is armed, to crush the
 seeds of apparent disorder in every corner of his dominions; let
 him effectually curb the spirit of dissension and variance among
 his people; let him remove the interruptions to government,
 arising from the refractory humours and the private interests of
 his subjects; let him collect the force of the state against its
 enemies, by availing himself of all it can furnish in the way of
 taxation and personal service: it is extremely probable, that,
 even under the direction of wishes for the good of mankind, he
 may break through every barrier of liberty, and establish a
 despotism, while he flatters himself, that he only follows the
 dictates of sense and propriety.
     When we suppose government to have bestowed a degree of
 tranquillity, which we sometimes hope to reap from it, as the
 best of its fruits, and public affairs to proceed, in the several
 departments of legislation and execution, with the least possible
 interruption to commerce and lucrative arts; such a state, like
 that of China, by throwing affairs into separate offices, where
 conduct consists in detail, and in the observance of forms, by
 superseding all the exertions of a great or a liberal mind, is
 more akin to despotism than we are apt to imagine.
     Whether oppression, injustice, and cruelty, are the only
 evils which attend on despotical government, may be considered
 apart. In the mean time it is sufficient to observe, that liberty
 is never in greater danger than it is when we measure national
 felicity by the blessings which a prince may bestow, or by the
 mere tranquillity which may attend on equitable administration.
 The sovereign may dazzle with his heroic qualities; he may
 protect his subjects in the enjoyment of every animal advantage
 or pleasure: but the benefits arising from liberty are of a
 different sort; they are not the fruits of a virtue, and of a
 goodness, which operate in the breast of one man, but the
 communication of virtue itself to many; and such a distribution
 of functions in civil society, as gives to numbers the exercises
 and occupations which pertain to their nature.
     The best constitutions of government are attended with
 inconvenience; and the exercise of liberty may, on many
 occasions, give rise to complaints. When we are intent on
 reforming abuses, the abuses of freedom may lead us to incroach
 on the subject from which they are supposed to arise. Despotism
 itself has certain advantages, or at least, in time of civility
 and moderation, may proceed with so little offence, as to give no
 public alarm. These circumstances may lead mankind, in the very
 spirit of reformation, or by mere inattention, to apply or to
 admit of dangerous innovations in the state of their policy.
     Slavery, however, is not always introduced by mere mistake;
 it is sometimes imposed in the spirit of violence and rapine.
 Princes become corrupt as well as their people; and whatever may
 have been the origin of despotical government, its pretensions,
 when fully explained, give rise to a contest between the
 sovereign and his subjects, which force alone can decide. These
 pretensions have a dangerous aspect to the person, the property,
 or the life of every subject; they alarm every passion in the
 human breast; they disturb the supine; they deprive the venal of
 his hire; they declare war on the corrupt as well as the
 virtuous; they are tamely admitted only by the coward; but even
 to him must be supported by a force that can work on his fears.
 This force the conqueror brings from abroad; and the domestic
 usurper endeavours to find in his faction at home.
     When a people is accustomed to arms, it is difficult for a
 part to subdue the whole; or before the establishment of
 disciplined armies, it is difficult for any usurper to govern the
 many by the help of a few. These difficulties, however, the
 policy of civilized and commercial nations has sometimes removed;
 and by forming a distinction between civil and military
 professions, by committing the keeping and the enjoyment of
 liberty to different hands, has prepared the way for the
 dangerous alliance of faction with military power, in opposition
 to mere political forms, and the rights of mankind.
     A people who are disarmed in compliance with this fatal
 refinement, have rested their safety on the pleadings of reason
 and justice at the tribunal of ambition and of force. In such an
 extremity, laws are quoted, and senates are assembled, in vain.
 They who compose a legislature, or who occupy the civil
 departments of state, may deliberate on the messages they receive
 from the camp or the court; but if the bearer, like the centurion
 who brought the petition of Octavius to the Roman senate, shew
 the hilt of his sword,(9*) they find that petitions are become
 commands, and that they themselves are become the pageants, not
 the repositories of sovereign power.
     The reflections of this section may be unequally applied to
 nations of unequal extent. Small communities, however corrupted,
 are not prepared for despotical government: their members,
 crouded together, and contiguous to the seats of power, never
 forget their relation to the public; they pry, with habits of
 familiarity and freedom, into the pretensions of those who would
 rule; and where the love of equality, and the sense of justice,
 have failed, they act on motives of faction, emulation, and envy.
 The exiled Tarquin had his adherents at Rome; but if by their
 means he had recovered his station, it is probable, that in the
 exercise of his royalty, he must have entered on a new scene of
 contention with the very party that restored him to power.
     In proportion as territory is extended, its parts lose their
 relative importance to the whole. Its inhabitants cease to
 perceive their connection with the state, and are seldom united
 in the execution of any national, or even of any factious,
 designs. Distance from the feats of administration, and
 indifference to the persons who contend for preferment, teach the
 majority to consider themselves as the subjects of a sovereignty,
 not as the members of a political body. It is even remarkable,
 that enlargement of territory, by rendering the individual of
 less consequence to the public, and less able to intrude with his
 counsel, actually tends to reduce national affairs within a
 narrower compass, as well as to diminish the numbers who are
 consulted in legislation, or in other matters of government.
     The disorders to which a great empire is exposed, require
 speedy prevention, vigilance, and quick execution. Distant
 provinces must be kept in subjection by military force; and the
 dictatorial powers, which, in free states, are sometimes raised
 to quell insurrections, or to oppose other occasional evils,
 appear, under a certain extent of dominion, at all times equally
 necessary to suspend the dissolution of a body, whose parts were
 assembled, and must be cemented, by measures forcible, decisive,
 and secret. Among the circumstances, therefore, which in the
 event of national prosperity, and in the result of commercial
 arts, lead to the establishment of despotism, there is none,
 perhaps, that arrives at this termination, with so sure an aim,
 as the perpetual enlargement of territory. In every state, the
 freedom of its members depends on the balance and adjustment of
 its interior parts; and the existence of any such freedom among
 mankind, depends on the balance of nations. In the progress of
 conquest, those who are subdued are said to have lost their
 liberties; but from the history of mankind, to conquer, or to be
 conquered, has appeared, in effect, the same.
 
 
 Section VI.
 
 Of the Progress and Termination of Despotism
 
     Mankind, when they degenerate, and tend to their ruin, as
 well as when they improve, and gain real advantages, frequently
 proceed by slow,and almost insensible,steps. If,during ages of
 activity and vigour, they fill up the measure of national
 greatness to a height which no human wisdom could at a distance
 foresee; they actually incur, in ages of relaxation and weakness,
 many evils which their fears did not suggest, and which, perhaps,
 they had thought far removed by the tide of success and
 prosperity.
     We have already observed, that where men are remiss or
 corrupted, the virtue of their leaders, or the good intention of
 their magistrates, will not always secure them in the possession
 of political freedom. Implicit submission to any leader, or the
 uncontrouled exercise of any power, even when it is intended to
 operate for the good of mankind, may frequently end in the
 subversion of legal establishments. This fatal revolution, by
 whatever means it is accomplished, terminates in military
 government; and this, though the simplest of all governments, is
 rendered complete by degrees. In the first period of its exercise
 over men who have acted as members of a free community, it can
 have only laid the foundation, not completed the fabric, of a
 despotical policy. The usurper, who has possessed, with an army,
 the centre of a great empire, sees around him, perhaps, the
 shattered remains of a former constitution; he may hear the
 murmurs of a reluctant and unwilling submission; he may even see
 danger in the aspect of many, from whose hands he may have
 wrested the sword, but whose minds he has not subdued, nor
 reconciled to his power.
     The sense of personal rights, or the pretension to privilege
 and honours, which remain among certain orders of men, are so
 many bars in the way of a recent usurpation. If they are not
 suffered to decay with age, and to wear away in the progress of a
 growing corruption, they must be broken with violence, and the
 entrance to every new accession of power must be stained with
 blood. The effect, even in this case, is frequently tardy. The
 Roman spirit, we know, was not entirely extinguished under a
 succession of masters, and under a repeated application of
 bloodshed and poison. The noble and respectable family still
 aspired to its original honours: The history of the republic, the
 writings of former times, the monuments of illustrious men, and
 the lessons of a philosophy fraught with heroic conceptions,
 continued to nourish the soul in retirement, and formed those
 eminent characters, whose elevation, and whose fate, are,
 perhaps, the most affecting subjects of human story. Though
 unable to oppose the general bent to servility, they became, on
 account of their supposed inclinations, objects of distrust and
 aversion; and were made to pay with their blood, the price of a
 sentiment which they fostered in silence, and which glowed only
 in the heart.
     While despotism proceeds in its progress, by what principle
 is the sovereign conducted in the choice of measures that tend to
 establish his government? By a mistaken apprehension of his own
 good, sometimes even of that of his people, and by the desire
 which he feels on every particular occasion, to remove the
 obstructions which impede the execution of his will. When he has
 fixed a resolution, whoever reasons or demonstrates against it is
 an enemy; when his mind is elated, whoever pretends to eminence,
 and is disposed to act for himself, is a rival. He would leave no
 dignity in the state, but what is dependent on himself; no active
 power, but what carries the expression of his momentary pleasure.
 Guided by a perception as unerring as that of instinct, he never
 fails to select the proper objects of his antipathy or of his
 favour. The aspect of independence repels him; that of servility
 attracts. The tendency of his administration is to quiet every
 restless spirit, and to assume every function of government to
 himself.(10*) When the power is adequate to the end, it operates
 as much in the hands of those who do not perceive the
 termination, as it does in the hands of others by whom it is best
 understood: the mandates of either, when just, should not be
 disputed; when erroneous or wrong, they are supported by force.
     You must die, was the answer of Octavius to every suit, from
 a people that implored his mercy. It was the sentence which some
 of his successors pronounced against every citizen that was
 eminent for his birth or his virtues. But are the evils of
 despotism confined to the cruel and sanguinary methods, by which
 a recent dominion over a refractory and a turbulent people is
 established or maintained? And is death the greatest calamity
 which can afflict mankind under an establishment by which they
 are divested of all their rights? They are, indeed, frequently
 suffered to live; but distrust, and jealousy, the sense of
 personal meanness, and the anxieties which arise from the care of
 a wretched interest, are made to possess the soul; every citizen
 is reduced to a slave; and every charm by which the community
 engaged its members, has ceased to exist. Obedience is the only
 duty that remains, and this is exacted by force. If under such an
 establishment, it be necessary to witness scenes of debasement
 and horror, at the hazard of catching the infection, death
 becomes a relief. and the libation which Thrasea was made to pour
 from his arteries, is to be considered as a proper sacrifice of
 gratitude to Jove the Deliverer.(11*)
     Oppression and cruelty are not always necessary to despotical
 government; and even when present, are but a part of its evils.
 It is founded on corruption, and on the suppression of all the
 civil and the political virtues; it requires its subjects to act
 from motives of fear; it would asswage the passions of a few men
 at the expence of mankind; and would erect the peace of society
 itself on the ruins of that freedom and confidence from which
 alone the enjoyment, the force, and the elevation of the human
 mind, are found to arise.
     During the existence of any free constitution, and whilst
 every individual possessed his rank and his privilege, or had his
 apprehension of personal rights, the members of every community
 were to one another objects of consideration and of respect;
 every point to be carried in civil society, required the exercise
 of talents, of wisdom, persuasion, and vigour, as well as of
 power. But it is the highest refinement of a despotical
 government, to rule by simple commands, and to exclude every art
 but that of compulsion. Under the influence of this policy,
 therefore, the occasions which employed and cultivated the
 understandings of men, which awakened their sentiments, and
 kindled their imaginations, are gradually removed; and the
 progress by which mankind attained to the honours of their
 nature, in being engaged to act in society upon a liberal
 footing, was not more uniform, or less interrupted, than that by
 which they degenerate in this unhappy condition.
     When we hear of the silence which reigns in the seraglio, we
 are made to believe, that speech itself is become unnecessary;
 and that the signs of the mute are sufficient to carry the most
 important mandates of government. No arts, indeed, are required
 to maintain an ascendant where terror alone is opposed to force,
 where the powers of the sovereign are delegated entire to every
 subordinate officer: nor can any station bestow a liberality of
 mind in a scene of silence and dejection, where every breast is
 possessed with jealousy and caution, and where no object, but
 animal pleasure, remains to balance the sufferings of the
 sovereign himself, or those of his subjects.
     In other states, the talents of men are sometimes improved by
 the exercises which belong to an eminent station: but here the
 master himself is probably the rudest and least cultivated animal
 of the herd; he is inferior to the slave whom he raises from a
 servile office to the first places of trust or of dignity in his
 court. The primitive simplicity which formed ties of familiarity
 and affection betwixt the sovereign and the keeper of his
 herds,(12*) appears, in the absence of all affections, to be
 restored, or to be counterfeited amidst the ignorance and
 brutality which equally characterise all orders of men, or rather
 which level the ranks, and destroy the distinction of persons in
 a despotical court.
     Caprice and passion are the rules of government with the
 prince. Every delegate of power is left to act by the same
 direction; to strike when he is provoked; to favour when he is
 pleased. In what relates to revenue, jurisdiction, or police,
 every governor of a province acts like a leader in an enemy's
 country; comes armed with the terrors of fire and sword; and
 instead of a tax, levies a contribution by force: he ruins or
 spares as either may serve his purpose. When the clamours of the
 oppressed, or the reputation of a treasure amassed at the expence
 of a province, have reached the ears of the sovereign, the
 extortioner is indeed made to purchase impunity by imparting a
 share, or by forfeiting the whole of his spoil; but no reparation
 is made to the injured; nay, the crimes of the minister are first
 employed to plunder the people, and afterwards punished to fill
 the coffers of the sovereign.
     In this total discontinuance of every art that relates to
 just government and national policy, it is remarkable, that even
 the trade of the soldier is itself greatly neglected. Distrust
 and jealousy on the part of the prince, come in aid of his
 ignorance and incapacity; and these causes operating together,
 serve to destroy the very foundation on which his power is
 established. Any undisciplined rout of armed men passes for an
 army, whilst a weak, dispersed, and unarmed people, are
 sacrificed to military disorder, or exposed to depredation on the
 frontier from an enemy, whom the desire of spoil, or the hopes of
 conquest, may have drawn to their neighbourhood.
     The Romans extended their empire till they left no polished
 nation to be subdued, and found a frontier which was every where
 surrounded by fierce and barbarous tribes; they even pierced
 through uncultivated deserts, in order to remove to a greater
 distance the molestation of such troublesome neighbours, and in
 order to possess the avenues through which they feared their
 attacks. But this policy put the finishing hand to the internal
 corruption of the state. A few years of tranquillity were
 sufficient to make even the government forget its danger; and in
 the cultivated province, prepared for the enemy, a tempting prize
 and an easy victory.
     When by the conquest and annexation of every rich and
 cultivated province, the measure of empire is full, two parties
 are sufficient to comprehend mankind; that of the pacific and the
 wealthy, who dwell within the pale of empire; and that of the
 poor, the rapacious, and the fierce, who are inured to
 depredation and war. The last bear to the first nearly the same
 relation which the wolf and the lion bear to the fold; and they
 are naturally engaged in a state of hostility.
     Were despotic empire, mean-time, to continue for ever
 unmolested from abroad, while it retains that corruption on which
 it was founded, it appears to have in itself no principle of new
 life, and presents no hope of restoration to freedom and
 political vigour. That which the despotical master has sown,
 cannot quicken unless it die; it must languish and expire by the
 effect of its own abuse, before the human spirit can spring up
 anew, or bear those fruits which constitute the honour and the
 felicity of human nature. In time of the greatest debasement,
 indeed, commotions are felt; but very unlike the agitations of a
 free people: they are either the agonies of nature, under the
 sufferings to which men are exposed; or mere tumults, confined to
 a few who stand in arms about the prince, and who, by their
 conspiracies, assassinations, and murders, serve only to plunge
 the pacific inhabitant still deeper in the horrors of fear or
 despair. Scattered in the provinces, unarmed, unacquainted with
 the sentiments of union and confederacy, restricted by habit to a
 wretched oeconomy, and dragging a precarious life on those
 possessions which the extortions of government have left; the
 people can no where, under these circumstances, assume the spirit
 of a community, nor form any liberal combination for their own
 defence. The injured may complain; and while he cannot obtain the
 mercy of government, he may implore the commiseration of his
 fellow-subject. But that fellow-subject is comforted, that the
 hand of oppression has not seized on himself: he studies his
 interest, or snatches his pleasure, under that degree of safety
 which obscurity and concealment bestow.
     The commercial arts, which seem to require no foundation in
 the minds of men, but the regard to interest; no encouragement,
 but the hopes of gain, and the secure possession of property,
 must perish under the precarious tenure of slavery, and under the
 apprehension of danger arising from the reputation of wealth.
 National poverty, however, and the suppression of commerce, are
 the means by which despotism comes to accomplish its own
 destruction. Where there are no longer any profits to corrupt, or
 fears to deter, the charm of dominion is broken, and the naked
 slave, as awake from a dream, is astonished to find he is free.
 When the fence is destroyed, the wilds are open, and the herd
 breaks loose. The pasture of the cultivated field is no longer
 preferred to that of the desert. The sufferer willingly flies
 where the extortions of government cannot overtake him; where
 even the timid and the servile may recollect they are men; where
 the tyrant may threaten, but where he is known to be no more than
 a fellow-creature; where he can take nothing but life, and even
 this at the hazard of his own.
     Agreeably to this description, the vexations of tyranny have
 overcome, in many parts of the East, the desire of settlement.
 The inhabitants of a village quit their habitations, and infest
 the public ways; those of the valleys fly to the mountains, and,
 equipt for flight, or possessed of a strong hold, subsist by
 depredation, and by the war they make on their former masters.
     These disorders conspire with the impositions of government
 to render the remaining settlements still less secure: but while
 devastation and ruin appear on every side, mankind are forced
 anew upon those confederacies, acquire again that personal
 confidence and vigour, that social attachment, that use of arms,
 which, in former times, rendered a small tribe the seed of a
 great nation; and which may again enable the emancipated slave to
 begin the career of civil and commercial arts. When human nature
 appears in the utmost state of corruption, it has actually begun
 to reform.
     In this manner, the scenes of human life have been frequently
 shifted. Security and presumption forfeit the advantages of
 prosperity; resolution and conduct retrieve the ills of
 adversity; and mankind, while they have nothing on which to rely
 but their virtue, are prepared to gain every advantage; and when
 they confide most in their fortune, are most exposed to feel its
 reverse. We are apt to draw these observations into rule; and
 when we are no longer willing to act for our country, we plead in
 excuse of our own weakness or folly, a supposed fatality in human
 affairs.
     The institutions of men are, indeed, likely to have their end
 as well as their beginning: but their duration is not fixed to
 any limited period; and no nation ever suffered internal decay
 but from the vice of its members. We are sometimes willing to
 acknowledge this vice in our countrymen; but who was ever willing
 to acknowledge it in himself? It may be suspected, however, that
 we do more than acknowledge it, when we cease to oppose its
 effects, and when we plead a fatality, which, at least, in the
 breast of every individual, is dependent on himself. Men of real
 fortitude, integrity, and ability, are well placed in every
 scene; they reap, in every condition, the principal enjoyments of
 their nature; they are the happy instruments of providence
 employed for the good of mankind; or, if we must change this
 language, they show, that while they are destined to live, the
 states they compose are likewise doomed by the fates to survive,
 and to prosper.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. The barbarous nations of Siberia, in general, are servile and
 timid.
 
 2. Chardin's travels through Mingrelia into Persia.
 
 3. Gemelli Carceri.
 
 4. Jovenal's 10th satire.
 
 5. These different occupations differ from each other, in respect
 to their dignity, and their innocence; but none of them are the
 schools from which men are brought to sustain the tottering
 fortune of nations; they are equally avocations from what ought
 to be the principal pursuit of man, the good of mankind.
 
 6. Est apud illos et opibus honos; eoque unus imperitat, &c.
 Tacitus De mor. Ger. c. 44.
 
 7. M. Antoninius, lib. 1.
 
 8. Our notion of order in civil society is frequently false: it
 is taken from the analogy of subjects inanimate and dead; we
 consider commotion and action as contrary to its nature; we think
 it consistent only with obedience, secrecy and the silent passing
 of affairs through the hands of a few. The good order of stones
 in a wall, is their being properly fixed in the places for which
 they are hewn; were they to stir the building must fall: but the
 order of men in society, is their being placed where they are
 properly qualified to act. The first is a fabric made of dead and
 inanimate parts, the second is made of living and active members.
 When we seek in society for the order of mere inaction and
 tranquility, we forget the nature of our subject, and find the
 order of slaves, not that of free men.
 
 9. Sueton.
 
 10. It is ridiculous to hear men of a restless ambition, who
 would be the only actors in every scene, sometimes complain of a
 refractory spirit in mankind; as if the same disposition from
 which they desire to usurp every office, did not incline every
 other person to reason and to act at least for himself.
 
 11. Porrectisque utriuque brachii venis, postquam cruorem
 effudit, humum super spargens, proprius vocato Quaestore,
 Libemus, inquit, Jovi Liberator. Specta juvenis; et omen quidem
 Dii prohibeant; ceterum in ea tempora natus es, quibus, firmare
 animum deceat constantibus exemplis. Tacit. Ann. lib. 16.
 
 12. See Odyssey.
 
 

End