



Part Fourth.
 
 Of Consequences that result from the Advancement of Civil and
 Commercial Arts
 
 Section I.
 
 Of the Separation of Arts and Professions.
 
     It is evident, that, however urged by a sense of necessity,
 and a desire of convenience, or favoured by any advantages of
 situation and policy, a people can make no great progress in
 cultivating the arts of life, until they have separated, and
 committed to different persons, the several tasks, which require
 a peculiar skill and attention. The savage, or the barbarian, who
 must build and plant, and fabricate for himself, prefers, in the
 interval of great alarms and fatigues, the enjoyments of sloth to
 the improvement of his fortune: he is, perhaps, by the diversity
 of his wants, discouraged from industry; or, by his divided
 attention, prevented from acquiring skill in the management of
 any particular subject.
     The enjoyment of peace, however, and the prospect of being
 able to exchange one commodity for another, turns, by degrees,
 the hunter and the warrior into a tradesman and a merchant. The
 accidents which distribute the means of subsistence unequally,
 inclination, and favourable opportunities, assign the different
 occupations of men; and a sense of utility leads them, without
 end, to subdivide their professions.
     The artist finds, that the more he can confine his attention
 to a particular part of any work, his productions are the more
 perfect, and grow under his hands in the greater quantities.
 Every undertaker in manufacture finds, that the more he can
 subdivide the tasks of his workmen, and the more hands he can
 employ on separate articles, the more are his expences
 diminished, and his profits increased. The consumer too requires,
 in every kind of commodity, a workmanship more perfect than hands
 employed on a variety of subjects can produce; and the progress
 of commerce is but a continued subdivision of the mechanical
 arts.
     Every craft may ingross the whole of a man's attention, and
 has a mystery which must be studied or learned by a regular
 apprenticeship. Nations of tradesmen come to consist of members
 who, beyond their own particular trade, are ignorant of all human
 affairs, and who may contribute to the preservation and
 enlargement of their commonwealth, without making its interest an
 object of their regard or attention. Every individual is
 distinguished by his calling, and has a place to which he is
 fitted. The savage, who knows no distinction but that of his
 merit, of his sex, or of his species, and to whom his community
 is the sovereign object of affection, is astonished to find, that
 in a scene of this nature, his being a man does not qualify him
 for any station whatever: he flies to the woods with amazement,
 distaste, and aversion.
     By the separation of arts and professions, the sources of
 wealth are laid open; every species of material is wrought up to
 the greatest perfection, and every commodity is produced in the
 greatest abundance. The state may estimate its profits and its
 revenues by the number of its people. It may procure, by its
 treasure, that national consideration and power, which the savage
 maintains at the expence of his blood.
     The advantage gained in the inferior branches of manufacture
 by the separation of their parts, seem to be equalled by those
 which arise from a similar device in the higher departments of
 policy and war. The soldier is relieved from every care but that
 of his service; statesmen divide the business of civil government
 into shares; and the servants of the public, in every office,
 without being skilful in the affairs of state, may succeed, by
 observing forms which are already established on the experience
 of others. They are made, like the parts of an engine, to concur
 to a purpose, without any concert of their own: and, equally
 blind with the trader to any general combination, they unite with
 him, in furnishing to the state its resources, its conduct, and
 its force.
     The artifices of the beaver, the ant, and the bee, are
 ascribed to the wisdom of nature. Those of polished nations are
 ascribed to themselves, and are supposed to indicate a capacity
 superior to that of rude minds. But the establishments of men,
 like those of every animal, are suggested by nature, and are the
 result of instinct, directed by the variety of situations in
 which mankind are placed. Those establishments arose from
 successive improvements that were made, without any sense of
 their general effect; and they bring human affairs to a state of
 complication, which the greatest reach of capacity with which
 human nature was ever adorned, could not have projected; nor even
 when the whole is carried into execution, can it be comprehended
 in its full extent.
     Who could anticipate, or even enumerate, the separate
 occupations and professions by which the members of any
 commercial state are distinguished; the variety of devices which
 are practised in separate cells, and which the artist, attentive
 to his own affair, has invented, to abridge or to facilitate his
 separate task? In coming to this mighty end, every generation,
 compared to its predecessors, may have appeared to be ingenious;
 compared to its followers, may have appeared to be dull: and
 human ingenuity, whatever heights it may have gained in a
 succession of ages, continues to move with an equal pace, and to
 creep in making the last as well as the first step of commercial
 or civil improvement.
     It may even be doubted, whether the measure of national
 capacity increases with the advancement of arts. Many mechanical
 arts, indeed, require no capacity; they succeed best under a
 total suppression of sentiment and reason; and ignorance is the
 mother of industry as well as of superstition. Reflection and
 fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand, or the
 foot, is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly,
 prosper most, where the mind is least consulted, and where the
 workshop may, without any great effort of imagination, be
 considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.
     The forest has been felled by the savage without the use of
 the axe, and weights have been raised without the aid of the
 mechanical powers. The merit of the inventor, in every branch,
 probably deserves a preference to that of the performer; and he
 who invented a tool, or could work without its assistance,
 deserved the praise of ingenuity in a much higher degree than the
 mere artist, who, by its assistance, produced a superior work.
     But if many parts in the practice of every art, and in the
 detail of every department, require no abilities, or actually
 tend to contract and to limit the views of the mind, there are
 others which lead to general reflections, and to enlargement of
 thought. Even in manufacture, the genius of the master, perhaps,
 is cultivated, while that of the inferior workman lies waste. The
 statesman may have a wide comprehension of human affairs, while
 the tools he employs are ignorant of the system in which they are
 themselves combined. The general officer may be a great
 proficient in the knowledge of war, while the soldier is confined
 to a few motions of the hand and the foot. The former may have
 gained, what the latter has lost; and being occupied in the
 conduct of disciplined armies, may practise on a larger scale,
 all the arts of preservation, of deception, and of stratagem,
 which the savage exerts in leading a small party, or merely in
 defending himself.
     The practitioner of every art and profession may afford
 matter of general speculation to the man of science; and thinking
 itself, in this age of separations, may become a peculiar craft.
 In the bustle of civil pursuits and occupations, men appear in a
 variety of lights, and suggest matter of inquiry and fancy, by
 which conversation is enlivened, and greatly enlarged. The
 productions of ingenuity are brought to the market; and men are
 willing to pay for whatever has a tendency to inform or amuse. By
 this means the idle, as well as the busy, contribute to forward
 the progress of arts, and bestow on polished nations that air of
 superior ingenuity, under which they appear to have gained the
 ends that were pursued by the savage in his forest, knowledge,
 order, and wealth.
 
 Section II.
 
 Of the Subordination consequent to the Separation of Arts and
 Professions
 
     There is one ground of subordination in the difference of
 natural talents and dispositions; a second in the unequal
 division of property; and a third, not less sensible, in the
 habits which are acquired by the practice of different arts.
     Some employments are liberal, others mechanic. They require
 different talents, and inspire different sentiments; and whether
 or not this be the cause of the preference we actually give, it
 is certainly reasonable to form our opinion of the rank that is
 due to men of certain professions and stations, from the
 influence of their manner of life in cultivating the powers of
 the mind, or in preserving the sentiments of the heart.
     There is an elevation natural to man, by which he would be
 thought, in his rudest state, however urged by necessity, to rise
 above the consideration of mere subsistence, and the regards of
 interest: He would appear to act only from the heart, in its
 engagements of friendship, or opposition; he would shew himself
 only upon occasions of danger or difficulty, and leave ordinary
 cares to the weak or the servile.
     The same apprehensions, in every situation, regulate his
 notions of meanness or of dignity. In that of polished society,
 his desire to avoid the character of sordid, makes him conceal
 his regard for what relates merely to his preservation or his
 livelihood. In his estimation, the beggar, who depends upon
 charity; the labourer, who toils that he may eat; the mechanic,
 whose art requires no exertion of genius, are degraded by the
 object they pursue, and by the means they employ to attain it.
 Professions requiring more knowledge and study; proceeding on the
 exercise of fancy, and the love of perfection; leading to
 applause as well as to profit, place the artist in a superior
 class, and bring him nearer to that station in which men are
 supposed to be highest; because in it they are bound to no task;
 because they are left to follow the disposition of the mind, and
 to take that part in society, to which they are led by the
 sentiments of the heart, or by the calls of the public.
     This last was the station, which, in the distinction betwixt
 freemen and slaves, the citizens of every ancient republic strove
 to gain, and to maintain for themselves. Women, or slaves, in the
 earliest ages, had been set apart for the purposes of domestic
 care, or bodily labour; and in the progress of lucrative arts,
 the latter were bred to mechanical professions, and were even
 intrusted with merchandise for the benefit of their masters.
 Freemen would be understood to have no object beside those of
 politics and war. In this manner, the honours of one half of the
 species were sacrificed to those of the other; as stones from the
 same quarry are buried in the foundation, to sustain the blocks
 which happen to be hewn for the superior parts of the pile. In
 the midst of our encomiums bestowed on the Greeks and the Romans,
 we are, by this circumstance, made to remember, that no human
 institution is perfect.
     In many of the Grecian states, the benefits arising to the
 free from this cruel distinction, were not conferred equally on
 all the citizens. Wealth being unequally divided, the rich alone
 were exempted from labour; the poor were reduced to work for
 their own subsistence: interest was a reigning passion in both,
 and the possession of slaves, like that of any other lucrative
 property, became an object of avarice, not an exemption from
 sordid attentions. The entire effects of the institution were
 obtained, or continued to be enjoyed for any considerable time,
 at Sparta alone. We feel its injustice; we suffer for the helot,
 under the severities and unequal treatment to which he was
 exposed: but when we think only of the superior order of men in
 this state; when we attend to that elevation and magnanimity of
 spirit, for which danger had no terror, interest no means to
 corrupt; when we consider them as friends, or as citizens, we are
 apt to forget, like themselves, that slaves have a title to be
 treated like men.
     We look for elevation of sentiment, and liberality of mind,
 among those orders of citizens, who, by their condition, and
 their fortunes, are relieved from sordid cares and attentions.
 This was the description of a free man at Sparta; and if the lot
 of a slave among the ancients was really more wretched than that
 of the indigent labourer and the mechanic among the moderns, it
 may be doubted, whether the superior orders, who are in
 possession of consideration and honours, do not proportionally
 fail in the dignity which befits their condition. If the
 pretensions to equal justice and freedom should terminate in
 rendering every class equally servile and mercenary, we make a
 nation of helots, and have no free citizens.
     In every commercial state, notwithstanding any pretension to
 equal rights, the exaltation of a few must depress the many. In
 this arrangement, we think that the extreme meanness of some
 classes must arise chiefly from the defect of knowledge, and of
 liberal education; and we refer to such classes, as to an image
 of what our species must have been in its rude and uncultivated
 state. But we forget how many circumstances, especially in
 populous cities, tend to corrupt the lowest orders of men.
 Ignorance is the least of their failings. An admiration of wealth
 unpossessed, becoming a principle of envy, or of servility; a
 habit of acting perpetually with a view to profit, and under a
 sense of subjection; the crimes to which they are allured, in
 order to feed their debauch, or to gratify their avarice, are
 examples, not of ignorance, but of corruption and baseness. If
 the savage has not received our instructions, he is likewise
 unacquainted with our vices. He knows no superior, and cannot be
 servile; he knows no distinctions of fortune, and cannot be
 envious; he acts from his talents in the highest station which
 human society can offer, that of the counsellor, and the soldier
 of his country. Toward forming his sentiments, he knows all that
 the heart requires to be known; he can distinguish the friend
 whom he loves, and the public interest which awakens his zeal.
     The principal objections to democratical or popular
 government, are taken from the inequalities which arise among men
 in the result of commercial arts. And it must be confessed, that
 popular assemblies, when composed of men whose dispositions are
 sordid, and whose ordinary applications are illiberal, however
 they may be intrusted with the choice of their masters and
 leaders, are certainly, in their own persons, unfit to command.
 How can he who has confined his views to his own subsistence or
 preservation, be intrusted with the conduct of nations? Such men,
 when admitted to deliberate on matters of state, bring to its
 councils confusion and tumult, or servility and corruption; and
 seldom suffer it to repose from ruinous factions, or the effect
 of resolutions ill formed or ill conducted.
     The Athenians retained their popular government under all
 these defects. The mechanic was obliged, under a penalty, to
 appear in the public market-place, and to hear debates on the
 subjects of war, and of peace. He was tempted by pecuniary
 rewards, to attend on the trial of civil and criminal causes. But
 notwithstanding an exercise tending so much to cultivate their
 talents, the indigent came always with minds intent upon profit,
 or with the habits of an illiberal calling. Sunk under the sense
 of their personal disparity and weakness, they were ready to
 resign themselves entirely to the influence of some popular
 leader, who flattered their passions, and wrought on their fears;
 or, actuated by envy, they were ready to banish from the state
 whomsoever was respectable and eminent in the superior order of
 citizens: and whether from their neglect of the public at one
 time, or their male-administration at another, the sovereignty
 was every moment ready to drop from their hands.
     The people, in this case, are, in fact, frequently governed
 by one, or a few, who know how to conduct them. Pericles
 possessed a species of princely authority at Athens; Crassus,
 Pompey, and Caesar, either jointly or successively, possessed for
 a considerable period the sovereign direction at Rome, Whether in
 great or in small states, democracy is preserved with difficulty,
 under the disparities of condition, and the unequal cultivation
 of the mind, which attend the variety of pursuits, and
 applications, that separate mankind in the advanced state of
 commercial arts. In this, however, we do but plead against the
 form of democracy, after the principle is removed; and see the
 absurdity of pretensions to equal influence and consideration,
 after the characters of men have ceased to be similar.
 
 Section III.
 
 Of the Manners of Polished and Commercial Nations
 
     Mankind, when in their rude state, have a great uniformity of
 manners; but when civilized, they are engaged in a variety of
 pursuits; they tread on a larger field, and separate to a greater
 distance. If they be guided, however, by similar dispositions,
 and by like suggestions of nature, they will probably, in the
 end, as well as in the beginning of their progress, continue to
 agree in many particulars; and while communities admit, in their
 members, that diversity of ranks and professions which we have
 already described, as the consequence or the foundation of
 commerce, they will resemble each other in many effects of this
 distribution, and of other circumstances in which they nearly
 concur.
     Under every form of government, statesmen endeavour to remove
 the dangers by which they are threatened from abroad, and the
 disturbances which molest them at home. By this conduct, if
 successful, they in a few ages gain an ascendant for their
 country; establish a frontier at a distance from its capital;
 they find, in the mutual desires of tranquillity, which come to
 possess mankind, and in those public establishments which tend to
 keep the peace of society, a respite from foreign wars, and a
 relief from domestic disorders. They learn to decide every
 contest without tumult, and to secure, by the authority of law,
 every citizen in the possession of his personal rights.
     In this condition, to which thriving nations aspire, and
 which they in some measure attain, mankind having laid the basis
 of safety, proceed to erect a superstructure suitable to their
 views. The consequence is various in different states; even in
 different orders of men of the same community; and the effect to
 every individual corresponds with his station. It enables the
 statesman and the soldier to settle the forms of their different
 procedure; it enables the practitioner in every profession to
 pursue his separate advantage; it affords the man of pleasure a
 time for refinement, and the speculative, leisure for literary
 conversation or study.
     In this scene, matters that have little reference to the
 active pursuits of mankind, are made subjects of inquiry, and the
 exercise of sentiment and reason itself becomes a profession. The
 songs of the bard, the harangues of the statesman and the
 warrior, the tradition and the story of ancient times, are
 considered as the models, or the earliest production, of so many
 arts, which it becomes the object of different professions to
 copy or to improve. The works of fancy, like the subjects of
 natural history, are distinguished into classes and species; the
 rules of every particular kind are distinctly collected; and the
 library is stored, like the warehouse, with the finished
 manufacture of different arts, who, with the aids of the
 grammarian and the critic, aspire, each in his particular way, to
 instruct the head, or to move the heart.
     Every nation is a motley assemblage of different characters,
 and contains, under any political form, some examples of that
 variety, which the humours, tempers, and apprehensions of men, so
 differently employed, are likely to furnish. Every profession has
 its point of honour, and its system of manners; the merchant his
 punctuality and fair dealing; the statesman his capacity and
 address; the man of society, his good-breeding and wit. Every
 station has a carriage, a dress, a ceremonial, by which it is
 distinguished, and by which it suppresses the national character
 under that of the rank, or of the individual.
     This description may be applied equally to Athens and Rome,
 to London and Paris. The rude or the simple observer would remark
 the variety he saw in the dwellings and in the occupations of
 different men, not in the aspect of different nations. He would
 find, in the streets of the same city, as great a diversity, as
 in the territory of a separate people. He could not pierce
 through the cloud that was gathered before him, nor see how the
 tradesman, mechanic, or scholar, of one country, should differ
 from those of another. But the native of every province can
 distinguish the foreigner; and when he himself travels, is struck
 with the aspect of a strange country, the moment he passes the
 bounds of his own, The air of the person, the tone of the voice,
 the idiom of language, and the strain of conversation, whether
 pathetic or languid, gay or severe, are no longer the same.
     Many such differences may arise among polished nations, from
 the effects of climate, or from sources of fashion, that are
 still more unaccountable and obscure; but the principal
 distinctions on which we can rest, are derived from the part a
 people are obliged to act in their national capacity; from the
 objects placed in their view by the state; or from the
 constitution of government, which prescribing the terms of
 society to its subjects, has a great influence in forming their
 apprehensions and habits.
     The Roman people, destined to acquire wealth by conquest, and
 by the spoil of provinces; the Carthaginians, intent on the
 returns of merchandise, and the produce of commercial
 settlements, must have filled the streets of their several
 capitals with men of a different disposition and aspect. The
 Roman laid hold of his sword when he wished to be great, and the
 state found her armies prepared in the dwellings of her people.
 The Carthaginian retired to his counter on a similar project;
 and, when the state was alarmed, or had resolved on a war, lent
 of his profits to purchase an army abroad.
     The member of a republic, and the subject of a monarchy, must
 differ, because they have different parts assigned to them by the
 forms of their country.. the one destined to live with his
 equals, or, by his personal talents and character, to contend for
 pre-eminence; the other, born to a determinate station, where any
 pretence to equality creates a confusion, and where nought but
 precedence is studied. Each, when the institutions of his country
 are mature, may find in the laws a protection to his personal
 rights; but those rights themselves are differently understood,
 and with a different set of opinions, give rise to a different
 temper of mind. The republican must act in the state, to sustain
 his pretensions; he must join a party, in order to be safe; he
 must form one, in order to be great. The subject of monarchy
 refers to his birth for the honour he claims; he waits on a
 court, to shew his importance; and holds out the ensigns of
 dependence and favour, to gain him esteem with the public.
     If national institutions, calculated for the preservation of
 liberty, instead of calling upon the citizen to act for himself,
 and to maintain his rights, should give a security, requiring, on
 his part, no personal attention or effort; this seeming
 perfection of government might weaken the bands of society, and,
 upon maxims of independence, separate and estrange the different
 ranks it was meant to reconcile. Neither the parties formed in
 republics, nor the courtly assemblies which meet in monarchical
 governments, could take place, where the sense of a mutual
 dependence should cease to summon their members together. The
 resorts for commerce might be frequented, and mere amusement
 might be pursued in the croud, while the private dwelling became
 a retreat for reserve, averse to the trouble arising from regards
 and attentions, which it might be part of the political creed to
 believe of no consequence, and a point of honour to hold in
 contempt.
     This humour is not likely to grow either in republics or
 monarchies: it belongs more properly to a mixture of both; where
 the administration of justice may be better secured; where the
 subject is tempted to look for equality, but where he finds only
 independence in its place; and where he learns, from a spirit of
 equality, to hate the very distinctions to which, on account of
 their real importance, he pays a remarkable deference.
     In either of the separate forms of republic or monarchy, or
 in acting on the principles of either, men are obliged to court
 their fellow-citizens, and to employ parts and address to improve
 their fortunes, or even to be safe. They find in both a school
 for discernment and penetration; but in the one, are taught to
 overlook the merits of a private character, for the sake of
 abilities that have weight with the public; and in the other, to
 overlook great and respectable talents, for the sake of qualities
 engaging or pleasant in the scene of entertainment, and private
 society, They are obliged, in both, to adapt themselves with care
 to the fashion and manners of their country. They find no place
 for caprice or singular humours. The republican must be popular,
 and the courtier polite. The first must think himself well placed
 in every company; the other must chuse his resorts, and desire to
 be distinguished only where the society itself is esteemed. With
 his inferiors, he takes an air of protection; and suffers, in his
 turn, the same air to be taken with himself. It did not, perhaps,
 require in a Spartan, who feared nothing but a failure in his
 duty, who loved nothing but his friend and the state, so constant
 a guard on himself to support his character, as it frequently
 does in the subject of a monarchy, to adjust his expence and his
 fortune to the desires of his vanity, and to appear in a rank as
 high as his birth, or ambition, can possibly reach.
     There is no particular, in the mean time, in which we are
 more frequently unjust, than in applying to the individual the
 supposed character of his country; or more frequently misled,
 than in taking our notion of a people from the example of one, or
 a few of their members. It belonged to the constitution of
 Athens, to have produced a Cleon, and a Pericles; but all the
 Athenians were not, therefore, like Cleon, or Pericles.
 Themistocles and Aristides lived in the same age; the one advised
 what was profitable; the other told his country what was just.
 
 Section IV.
 
 The Same subject continued
 
     The law of Nature, with respect to nations, is the same that
 it is with respect to individuals. it gives to the collective
 body a right to preserve themselves; to employ, undisturbed, the
 means of life; to retain the fruits of labour; to demand the
 observance of stipulations and contracts. In the case of
 violence, it condemns the aggressor, and establishes, on the part
 of the injured, the right of defence, and a claim to retribution.
 Its applications, however, admit of disputes, and give rise to
 variety in the apprehension, as well as the practice of mankind.
     Nations have agreed universally, in distinguishing right from
 wrong; in exacting the reparation of injuries by consent or by
 force. They have always reposed, in a certain degree, on the
 faith of treaties; but have acted as if force were the ultimate
 arbiter in all their disputes, and the power to defend
 themselves, the surest pledge of their safety. Guided by these
 common apprehensions, they have differed from one another, not
 merely in points of form, but in points of the greatest
 importance, respecting the usage of war, the effects of
 captivity, and the rights of conquest and victory.
     When a number of independent communities have been frequently
 involved in wars, and have had their stated alliances and
 oppositions, they adopt customs which they make the foundation of
 rules, or of laws, to be observed, or alledged, in all their
 mutual transactions. Even in war itself, they would follow a
 system, and plead for the observance of forms in their very
 operations for mutual destruction.
     The ancient states of Greece and Italy derived their manners
 in war from the nature of their republican government; those of
 modern Europe, from the influence of monarchy, which, by its
 prevalence in this part of the world, has a great effect on
 nations, even where it is not the form established, Upon the
 maxims of this government, we apprehend a distinction between the
 state and its members, as that between the King and the people,
 which renders war an operation of policy, not of popular
 animosity. While we strike at the public interest, we would spare
 the private; and we carry a respect and consideration for
 individuals, which often stops the issues of blood in the ardour
 of victory, and procures to the prisoner of war a hospitable
 reception in the very city which he came to destroy. These
 practices are so well established, that scarcely any provocation
 on the part of an enemy, or any exigence of service, can excuse a
 trespass on the supposed rules of humanity, or save the leader
 who commits it from becoming an object of detestation and horror.
     To this, the general practice of the Greeks and the Romans
 was opposite. They endeavoured to wound the state by destroying
 its members, by desolating its territory, and by ruining the
 possessions of its subjects. They granted quarter only to
 inslave, or to bring the prisoner to a more solemn execution; and
 an enemy, when disarmed, was, for the most part, either sold in
 the market, or killed, that he might never return to strengthen
 his party. When this was the issue of war, it was no wonder, that
 battles were fought with desperation, and that every fortress was
 defended to the last extremity. The game of human life went upon
 a high stake, and was played with a proportional zeal.
     The term barbarian, in this state of manners, could not be
 employed by the Greeks or the Romans in that sense in which we
 use it; to characterise a people regardless of commercial arts;
 profuse of their own lives, and of those of others; vehement in
 their attachment to one society, and implacable in their
 antipathy to another. This, in a great and shining part of their
 history, was their own character, as well as that of some other
 nations, whom, upon this very account, we distinguish by the
 appellations of barbarous or rude.
     It has been observed, that those celebrated nations are
 indebted, for a great part of their estimation, not to the matter
 of their history, but to the manner in which it has been
 delivered, and to the capacity of their historians, and other
 writers. Their story has been told by men who knew how to draw
 our attention on the proceedings of the understanding and of the
 heart, more than on the detail of facts; and who could exhibit
 characters to be admired and loved, in the midst of actions which
 we should now universally hate or condemn. Like Homer, the model
 of Grecian literature, they could make us forget the horrors of a
 vindictive, cruel, and remorseless proceeding towards an enemy,
 in behalf of the strenuous conduct, the courage, and vehement
 affections, with which the hero maintained the cause of his
 friend and of his country.
     Our manners are so different, and the system upon which we
 regulate our apprehensions, in many things, so opposite, that no
 less could make us endure the practice of ancient nations. Were
 that practice recorded by the mere journalist, who retains only
 the detail of events, without throwing any light on the character
 of the actors; who, like the Tartar historian, tells only what
 blood was spilt in the field, and how many inhabitants were
 massacred in the city; we should never have distinguished the
 Greeks from their barbarous neighbours, nor have thought, that
 the character of civility pertained even to the Romans, till very
 late in their history, and in the decline of their empire.
     It would, no doubt, be pleasant to see the remarks of such a
 traveller as we sometimes send abroad to inspect the manners of
 mankind, left, unassisted by history, to collect the character of
 the Greeks from the state of their country, or from their
 practice in war. 'This country,' he might say, 'compared to ours,
 has an air of barrenness and desolation. I saw upon the road
 troops of labourers, who were employed in the fields; but no
 where the habitations of the master and the landlord. It was
 unsafe, I was told, to reside in the country; and the people of
 every district crouded into towns to find a place of defence. It
 is indeed impossible, that they can be more civilized, till they
 have established some regular government, and have courts of
 justice to hear their complaints. At present, every town, nay, I
 may say, every village, acts for itself, and the greatest
 disorders prevail. I was not indeed molested; for you must know,
 that they call themselves nations, and do all their mischief
 under the pretence of war.
     'I do not mean to take any of the liberties of travellers,
 nor to vie with the celebrated author of the voyage to Lilliput;
 but cannot help endeavouring to communicate what I felt on
 hearing them speak of their territory, their armies, their
 revenue, treaties, and alliances. Only imagine the church-wardens
 and constables of Highgate or Hampstead turned statesmen and
 generals, and you will have a tolerable conception of this
 singular country. I passed through one state, where the best
 house in the capital would not lodge the meanest of your
 labourers, and where your very beggars would not chuse to dine
 with the King; and yet they are thought a great nation, and have
 no less than two kings. I saw one of them; but such a potentate!
 he had scarcely cloaths to his back; and for his Majesty's table,
 he was obliged to go to the eating-house with his subjects. They
 have not a single farthing of money; and I was obliged to get
 food at the public expence, there being none to be had in the
 market. You will imagine, that there must have been a service of
 plate, and great attendance, to wait upon the illustrious
 stranger; but my fare was a mess of sorry pottage, brought me by
 a naked slave, who left me to deal with it as I thought proper:
 and even this I was in continual danger of having stoln from me
 by the children, who are as vigilant to seize opportunities, and
 as dextrous in snatching their food, as any starved greyhound you
 ever saw. The misery of the whole people, in short, as well as my
 own, while I staid there, was beyond description. You would think
 that their whole attention were to torment themselves as much as
 they can: they are even displeased with one of their kings for
 being well liked. He had made a present, while I was there, of a
 cow to one favourite, and of a waistcoat to another;(1*) and it
 was publicly said, that this method of gaining friends was
 robbing the public. My landlord told me very gravely, that a man
 should come under no obligation that might weaken the love which
 he owes to his country; nor form any personal attachment beyond
 the mere habit of living with his friend, and of doing him a
 kindness when he can.
     'I asked him once, Why they did not, for their own sakes,
 enable their kings to assume a little more state? Because, says
 he, we intend them the happiness of living with men. When I found
 fault with their houses, and said in particular, that I was
 surprised they did not build better churches; What would you be
 then, says he, if you found religion in stone walls? This will
 suffice for a sample of our conversation; and sententious as it
 was, you may believe I did not stay long to profit by it.
     'The people of this place are not quite so stupid. There is a
 pretty large square of a market-place, and some tolerable
 buildings; and, I am told, they have some barks and lighters
 employed in trade, which they likewise, upon occasion, muster
 into a fleet, like my Lord Mayor's shew. But what pleases me
 most, is, that I am likely to get a passage from hence, and bid
 farewell to this wretched country. I have been at some pains to
 observe their ceremonies of religion, and to pick up curiosities.
 I have copied some inscriptions, as you will see when you come to
 peruse my journal, and will then judge, whether I have met with
 enough to compensate the fatigues and bad entertainment to which
 I have submitted. As for the people, you will believe, from the
 specimen I have given you, that they could not be very engaging
 company: though poor and dirty, they still pretend to be proud;
 and a fellow who is not worth a groat, is above working for his
 livelihood. They come abroad barefooted, and without any cover to
 the head, wrapt up in the coverlets under which you would imagine
 they had slept. They throw all off, and appear like so many naked
 cannibals, when they go to violent sports and exercises; at which
 they highly value feats of dexterity and strength. Brawny limbs,
 and muscular arms, the faculty of sleeping out all nights, of
 fasting long, and of putting up with any kind of food, are
 thought genteel accomplishments. They have no settled government
 that I could learn; sometimes the mob, and sometimes the better
 sort, do what they please: they meet in great crouds in the open
 air, and seldom agree about any thing. If a fellow has
 presumption enough, and a loud voice, he can make a great figure.
 There was a tanner here, some time ago, who, for a while, carried
 every thing before him. He censured so loudly what others had
 done, and talked so big of what might be performed, that he was
 sent out at last to make good his words, and to curry the enemy
 instead of his leather.(2*) You will imagine, perhaps, that he
 was pressed for a recruit; no; -- he was sent to command the
 army. They are indeed seldom long of one mind, except in their
 readiness to harass their neighbours. They go out in bodies, and
 rob, pillage, and murder where-ever they come.' So far may we
 suppose our traveller to have written; and upon a recollection of
 the reputation which those nations have acquired at a distance,
 he might have added, perhaps, 'That he could not understand how
 scholars, fine gentlemen, and even women, should combine to
 admire a people, who so little resemble themselves.'
     To form a judgement of the character from which they acted in
 the field, and in their competitions with neighbouring nations,
 we must observe them at home. They were bold and fearless in
 their civil dissensions; ready to proceed to extremities, and to
 carry their debates to the decision of force. Individuals stood
 distinguished by their personal spirit and vigour, not by the
 valuation of their estates, Or the rank of their birth. They had
 a personal elevation founded on the sense of equality, not of
 precedence. The general of one campaign was, during the next, a
 private soldier, and served in the ranks. They were solicitous to
 acquire bodily strength; because, in the use of their weapons,
 battles were a trial of the soldier's strength, as well as of the
 leader's conduct, The remains of their statuary, shews a manly
 grace, an air of simplicity and ease, which being frequent in
 nature, were familiar to the artist. The mind, perhaps, borrowed
 a Confidence and force, from the vigour and address of the body;
 their eloquence and style bore a resemblance to the carriage of
 the person. The understanding was chiefly cultivated in the
 practice of affairs. The most respectable personages were obliged
 to mix with the croud, and derived their degree of ascendency,
 only from their conduct, their eloquence, and personal vigour.
 They had no forms of expression, to mark a ceremonious and
 guarded respect. Invective proceeded to railing, and the grossest
 terms were often employed by the most admired and accomplished
 orators. Quarrelling had no rules but the immediate dictates of
 passion, which ended in words of reproach, in violence, and
 blows. They fortunately went always unarmed; and to wear a sword
 in times of peace, was among them the mark of a barbarian. When
 they took arms in the divisions of faction, the prevailing party
 supported itself by expelling their opponents, by proscriptions,
 and bloodshed. The usurper endeavoured to maintain his station by
 the most violent and prompt executions. He was opposed, in his
 turn, by conspiracies and assassinations, in which the most
 respectable citizens were ready to use the dagger.
     Such was the character of their spirit, in its occasional
 ferments at home; and it burst commonly with a suitable violence
 and force, against their foreign rivals and enemies. The amiable
 plea of humanity was little regarded by them in the operations of
 war. Cities were razed, or inslaved; the captive sold, mutilated,
 or condemned to die.
     When viewed on this side, the ancient nations have but a
 sorry plea for esteem with the inhabitants of modern Europe, who
 profess to carry the civilities of peace into the practice of
 war; and who value the praise of indiscriminate lenity at a
 higher rate than even that of military prowess, or the love of
 their country. And yet they have, in other respects, merited and
 obtained our praise. Their ardent attachment to their country;
 their contempt of suffering, and of death, in its cause. their
 manly apprehensions of personal independence, which rendered
 every individual, even under tottering establishments, and
 imperfect laws, the guardian of freedom to his fellow-citizens;
 their activity of mind; in short, their penetration, the ability
 of their conduct, and force of their spirit, have gained them the
 first rank among nations.
     If their animosities were great, their affections were
 proportionate: they, perhaps, loved, where we only pity; and were
 stern and inexorable, where we are not merciful, but only
 irresolute. After all, the merit of a man is determined by his
 candour and generosity to his associates, by his zeal for
 national objects, and by his vigour in maintaining political
 rights; not by moderation alone, which proceeds frequently from
 indifference to national and public interests, and which serves
 to relax the nerves on which the force of a private as well as a
 public character depends.
     When under the Macedonian and the Roman monarchies, a nation
 came to be considered as the estate of a prince, and the
 inhabitants of a province to be regarded as a lucrative property,
 the possession of territory, not the destruction of its people,
 became the object of conquest. The pacific citizen had little
 concern in the quarrels of sovereigns; the violence of the
 soldier was restrained by discipline. He fought, because he was
 taught to carry arms, and to obey: he sometimes shed unnecessary
 blood in the ardour of victory; but, except in the case of civil
 wars, had no passions to excite his animosity beyond the field
 and the day of battle. Leaders judged of the objects of an
 enterprise, and they arrested the sword when these were obtained.
     In the modern nations of Europe, where extent of territory
 admits of a distinction between the state and its subjects, we
 are accustomed to think of the individual with compassion, seldom
 of the public with zeal. We have improved on the laws of war, and
 on the lenitives which have been devised to soften its rigours;
 we have mingled politeness with the use of the sword; we have
 learned to make war under the stipulations of treaties and
 cartels, and trust to the faith of an enemy whose ruin we
 meditate. Glory is more successfully obtained by saving and
 protecting, than by destroying the vanquished: and the most
 amiable of all objects is, in appearance, attained; the employing
 of force, only for the obtaining of justice, and for the
 preservation of national rights.
     This is, perhaps, the principal characteristic, on which,
 among modern nations, we bestow the epithets of civilized or of
 polished. But we have seen, that it did not accompany the
 progress of arts among the Greeks, nor keep pace with the
 advancement of policy, literature, and philosophy. it did not
 await the returns of learning and politeness among the moderns;
 it was found in early periods of our history, and distinguished,
 perhaps, more than at present, the manners of ages otherwise rude
 and undisciplined. A King of France, prisoner in the hands of his
 enemies, was treated, about four hundred years ago, with as much
 distinction and courtesy, as a crowned head, in the like
 circumstances, could possibly expect in this age of
 politeness.(3*) The Prince of Conde, defeated and taken in the
 battle of Dreux, slept at night in the same bed with his enemy
 the Duke of Guise.(4*)
     If the moral of popular traditions, and the taste of fabulous
 legends, which are the production or entertainment of particular
 ages, are likewise sure indications of their notions and
 characters, we may presume, that the foundation of what is now
 held to be the law of war, and of nations, was laid in the
 manners of Europe, together with the sentiments which are
 expressed in the tales of chivalry, and of gallantry. Our system
 of war differs not more from that of the Greeks, than the
 favourite characters of our early romance differed from those of
 the iliad, and of every ancient poem. The hero of the Greek
 fable, endued with superior force, courage, and address, takes
 every advantage of an enemy, to kill with safety to himself; and
 actuated by a desire of spoil, or by a principle of revenge, is
 never stayed in his progress by interruptions of remorse or
 compassion. Homer, who, of all poets, knew best how to exhibit
 the emotions of a vehement affection, seldom attempts to excite
 commiseration. Hector falls unpitied, and his body is insulted by
 every Greek.
     Our modern fable, or romance, on the contrary, generally
 couples an object of pity, weak, oppressed, and defenceless, with
 an object of admiration, brave, generous, and victorious; or
 sends the hero abroad in search of mere danger, and of occasions
 to prove his valour. Charged with the maxims of a refined
 courtesy, to be observed even towards an enemy; and of a
 scrupulous honour, which will not suffer him to take any
 advantages by artifice or surprise; indifferent to spoil, he
 contends only for renown, and employs his valour to rescue the
 distressed, and to protect the innocent. If victorious, he is
 made to rise above nature as much in his generosity and
 gentleness, as in his military prowess and valour.
     It may be difficult, upon stating this contrast between the
 system of ancient and modern fable, to assign, among nations
 equally rude, equally addicted to war, and equally fond of
 military glory, the origin of apprehensions on the point of
 honour, so different, and so opposite. The hero of Greek poetry
 proceeds on the maxims of animosity and hostile passion. His
 maxims in war are like those which prevail in the woods of
 America. They require him to be brave, but they allow him to
 practise against his enemy every sort of deception. The hero of
 modern romance professes a contempt of stratagem, as well as of
 danger, and unites in the same person, characters and
 dispositions seemingly opposite; ferocity with gentleness, and
 the love of blood with sentiments of tenderness and pity.
     The system of chivalry, when completely formed, proceeded on
 a marvellous respect and veneration to the fair sex, on forms of
 combat established, and on a supposed junction of the heroic and
 sanctified character. The formalities of the duel, and a kind of
 judicial challenge, were known among the ancient Celtic nations
 of Europe. The Germans, even in their native forests, paid a kind
 of devotion to the female sex. The Christian religion injoined
 meekness and compassion to barbarous ages. These different
 principles combined together, may have served as the foundation
 of a system, in which courage was directed by religion and love,
 and the warlike and gentle were united together. When the
 characters of the hero and the saint were mixed, the mild spirit
 of Christianity, though often turned into venom by the bigotry of
 opposite parties, though it could not always subdue the ferocity
 of the warrior, nor suppress the admiration of courage and force,
 may have confirmed the apprehensions of men in what was to be
 held meritorious and splendid in the conduct of their quarrels.
     In the early and traditionary history of the Greeks and the
 Romans, rapes were assigned as the most frequent occasions of
 war; and the sexes were, no doubt, at all times, equally
 important to each other. The enthusiasm of love is most powerful
 in the neighbourhood of Asia and Africa; and beauty, as a
 possession, was probably more valued by the countrymen of Homer,
 than it was by those of Amadis de Gaul, or by the authors of
 modern gallantry. 'What wonder, says the old Priam, when Helen
 appeared, 'that nations should contend for the possession of so
 much beauty?' This beauty, indeed, was possessed by different
 lovers; a subject on which the modern hero had many refinements,
 and seemed to soar in the clouds. He adored at a respectful
 distance, and employed his valour to captivate the admiration,
 not to gain the possession of his mistress. A cold and
 unconquerable chastity was set up, as an idol to be worshipped,
 in the toils, the sufferings, and the combats of the hero and the
 lover.
     The feudal establishments, by the high rank to which they
 elevated certain families, no doubt greatly favoured this
 romantic system. Not only the lustre of a noble descent, but the
 stately castle beset with battlements and towers, served to
 inflame the imagination, and create a veneration for the daughter
 and the sister of gallant chiefs, whose point of honour it was to
 be inaccessible and chaste, and who could perceive no merit but
 that of the high-minded and the brave, nor be approached in any
 other accents than those of gentleness and respect.
     What was originally singular in these apprehensions, was, by
 the writer of romance, turned to extravagance; and under the
 title of chivalry was offered as a model of conduct, even in
 common affairs: the fortunes of nations were directed by
 gallantry; and human life, on its greatest occasions, became a
 scene of affectation and folly. Warriors went forth to realize
 the legends they had studied; princes and leaders of armies
 dedicated their most serious exploits to a real or to a fancied
 mistress.
     But whatever was the origin of notions, often so lofty and so
 ridiculous, we cannot doubt of their lasting effects on our
 manners. The point of honour, the prevalence of gallantry in our
 conversations, and on our theatres, many of the opinions which
 the vulgar apply even to the conduct of war; their notion, that
 the leader of an army, being offered battle upon equal terms, is
 dishonoured by declining it, are undoubtedly remains of this
 antiquated system: and chivalry, uniting with the genius of our
 policy, has probably suggested those peculiarities in the law of
 nations, by which modern states are distinguished from the
 ancient. And if our rule in measuring degrees of politeness and
 civilization is to be taken from hence, or from the advancement
 of commercial arts, we shall be found to have greatly excelled
 any of the celebrated nations of antiquity.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. Plutarch, in the Life of Agesilaus.
 
 2. Thucydides, lib. 4. -- Aristophanes.
 
 3. Hume's History of England.
 
 4. Davila.
 
 