



 Part Third
 
 Of the History of Policy and Arts
 
 Section I
 
 Of the Influences of Climate and Situation
 
     What we have hitherto observed on the condition and manners
 of nations, though chiefly derived from what has passed in the
 temperate climates, may, in some measure, be applied to the rude
 state of mankind in every part of the earth: but if we intend to
 pursue the history of our species in its further attainments, we
 may soon enter on subjects which will confine our observation to
 more narrow limits. The genius of political wisdom and civil arts
 appears to have chosen his seats in particular tracts of the
 earth, and to have selected his favourites in particular races of
 men.
     Man, in his animal capacity, is qualified to subsist in every
 climate. He reigns with the lion and the tyger under the
 equatorial beats of the sun, or be associates with the bear and
 the raindeer beyond the polar circle. His versatile disposition
 fits him to assume the habits of either condition, or his talent
 for arts enables him to supply its defects. The intermediate
 climates, however, appear most to favour his nature; and in
 whatever manner we account for the fact, it cannot be doubted,
 that this animal has always attained to the principal honours of
 his species within the temperate zone. The arts, which he has on
 this scene repeatedly invented, the extent of his reason, the
 fertility of his fancy, and the force of his genius in
 literature, commerce, policy, and war, sufficiently declare
 either a distinguished advantage of situation, or a natural
 superiority of mind.
     The most remarkable races of men, it is true, have been rude
 before they were polished. They have in some cases returned to
 rudeness again: and it is not from the actual possession of arts,
 science, or policy, that we are to pronounce of their genius.
     There is a vigour, a reach of capacity, and a sensibility of
 mind, which may characterise as well the savage as the citizen,
 the slave as well as the master; and the same powers of the mind
 may be turned to a variety of purposes. A modern Greek, perhaps,
 is mischievous, slavish, and cunning, from the same animated
 temperament that made his ancestor ardent, ingenious, and bold,
 in the camp, or in the council of his nation. A modern Italian is
 distinguished by sensibility, quickness, and art, while he
 employs on trifles the capacity of an ancient Roman; and exhibits
 now, in the scene of amusement, and in the search of a frivolous
 applause, that fire, and those passions, with which Gracchus
 burned in the forum, and shook the assemblies of a severer
 people.
     The commercial and lucrative arts have been, in some
 climates, the principal object of mankind, and have been retained
 through every disaster; in others, even under all the
 fluctuations of fortune, they have still been neglected; while in
 the temperate climates of Europe and Asia, they have had their
 ages of admiration as well as contempt.
     In one state of society, arts are slighted, from that very
 ardour of mind, and principle of activity, by which, in another;
 they are practised with the greatest success. While men are
 ingrossed by their passions, heated and roused by the struggles
 and dangers of their country; while the trumpet sounds, or the
 alarm of social engagement is rung, and the heart beats high, it
 were a mark of dullness, or of an abject spirit, to find leisure
 for the study of ease, or the pursuit of improvements, which have
 mere convenience or ease for their object.
     The frequent vicissitudes and reverses of fortune, which
 nations have experienced on that very ground where the arts have
 prospered, are probably the effects of a busy, inventive, and
 versatile spirit, by which men have carried every national
 pursuit to extremes. They have raised the fabric of despotic
 empire to its greatest height, where they had best understood the
 foundations of freedom. They perished in the flames which they
 themselves had kindled; and they only, perhaps, were capable of
 displaying, by turns, the greatest improvements, or the lowest
 corruptions, to which the human mind can be brought.
     On this scene, mankind have twice, within the compass of
 history, ascended from rude beginnings to very high degrees of
 refinement. In every age, whether destined by its temporary
 disposition to build or to destroy, they have left the vestiges
 of an active and vehement spirit. The pavement and the ruins of
 Rome are buried in dust, shaken from the feet of barbarians, who
 trod with contempt on the refinements of luxury, and spurned
 those arts, the use of which it was reserved for the posterity of
 the same people to discover and to admire. The tents of the wild
 Arab are even now pitched among the ruins of magnificent cities;
 and the waste fields which border On Palestine and Syria, are
 perhaps become again the nursery of infant nations. The chieftain
 of an Arab tribe, like the founder of Rome, may have already
 fixed the roots of a plant that is to flourish in some future
 period, or laid the foundations of a fabric, that will attain to
 its grandeur in some distant age.
     Great part of Africa has been always unknown; but the silence
 of fame, on the subject of its revolutions, is an argument, where
 no other proof can be found, of weakness in the genius of its
 people. The torrid zone, every where round the globe, however
 known to the geographer, has furnished few materials for history;
 and though in many places supplied with the arts of life in no
 contemptible degree, has no where matured the more important
 projects of political wisdom, nor inspired the virtues which are
 connected with freedom, and required in the conduct of civil
 affairs.
     It was indeed in the torrid zone that mere arts of mechanism
 and manufacture were found, among the inhabitants of the new
 world, to have made the greatest advance: it is in India, and in
 the regions of this hemisphere, which are visited by the vertical
 sun, that the arts of manufacture, and the practice of commerce,
 are of the greatest antiquity, and have survived, with the
 smallest diminution, the ruins of time, and the revolutions of
 empire.
     The sun, it seems, which ripens the pine-apple and the
 tamarind, inspires a degree of mildness than can even assuage the
 rigours of despotical government: and such is the effect of a
 gentle and pacific disposition in the natives of the East, that
 no conquest, no irruption of barbarians, terminates, as they did
 among the stubborn natives of Europe, by a total destruction of
 what the love of ease and of pleasure had produced.
     Transferred, without any great struggle, from one master to
 another, the natives of India are ready, upon every charge, to
 pursue their industry, to acquiesce in the enjoyment of life, and
 the hopes of animal pleasure: the wars of conquest are not
 prolonged to exasperate the parties engaged in them, or to
 desolate the land for which those parties contend: even the
 barbarous invader leaves untouched the commercial settlement
 which has not provoked his rage: though master of opulent cities,
 he only incamps in their neighbourhood, and leaves to his heirs
 the option of entering, by degrees, on the pleasures, the vices,
 and the pageantries his acquisitions afford: his successors,
 still more than himself, are disposed to foster the hive, in
 proportion as they taste more of its sweets; and they spare the
 inhabitant, together with his dwelling, as they spare the herd or
 the stall, of which they are become the proprietors.
     The modern description of India is a repetition of the
 ancient, and the present state of China is derived from a distant
 antiquity, to which there is no parallel in the history of
 mankind. The succession of monarchs has been changed; but no
 revolutions have affected the state. The African and the Samoiede
 are not more uniform in their ignorance and barbarity, than the
 Chinese and the Indian, if we may credit their own story, have
 been in the practice of manufacture, and in the observance of a
 certain police, which was calculated only to regulate their
 traffic, and to protect them in their application to servile or
 lucrative arts.
     If we pass from these general representations of what mankind
 have done, to the more minute description of the animal himself,
 as he has occupied different climates, and is diversified in his
 temper, complexion, and character, we shall find a variety of
 genius corresponding to the effects of his conduct, and the
 result of his story.
     Man, in the perfection of his natural faculties, is quick and
 delicate in his sensibility; extensive and various in his
 imaginations and reflections; attentive, penetrating, and
 subtile, in what relates to his fellow-creatures; firm and ardent
 in his purposes; devoted to friendship or to enmity; jealous of
 his independence and his honour, which he will not relinquish for
 safety or for profit: under all his corruptions or improvements,
 he retains his natural sensibility, if not his force; and his
 commerce is a blessing or a curse, according to the direction his
 mind has received.
     But under the extremes of heat or of cold, the active range
 of the human soul appears to be limited; and men are of inferior
 importance, either as friends, or as enemies. In the one extreme,
 they are dull and slow, moderate in their desires, regular and
 pacific in their manner of life; in the other, they are feverish
 in their passions, weak in their judgements, and addicted by
 temperament to animal pleasure. In both the heart is mercenary,
 and makes important concessions for childish bribes: in both the
 spirit is prepared for servitude: in the one it is subdued by
 fear of the future; in the other it is not roused even by its
 sense of the present.
     The nations of Europe who would settle or conquer on the
 south or the north of their own happier climates, find little
 resistance: they extend their dominion at pleasure, and find no
 where a limit but in the ocean, and in the satiety of conquest.
 With few of the pangs and the struggles that precede the
 reduction of nations, mighty provinces have been successively
 annexed to the territory of Russia; and its sovereign, who
 accounts within his domain, entire tribes, with whom perhaps none
 of his emissaries have ever conversed, dispatched a few geometers
 to extend his empire, and thus to execute a project, in which the
 Romans were obliged to employ their consuls and their
 legions.(1*) These modern conquerors complain of rebellion, where
 they meet with repugnance; and are surprised at being treated as
 enemies, where they come to impose their tribute.
     It appears, however, that on the shores of the Eastern sea,
 they have met with nations(2*) who have questioned their title to
 reign, and who have considered the requisition of a tax as the
 demand of effects for nothing. Here perhaps may be found the
 genius of ancient Europe, and under its name of ferocity, the
 spirit of national independence;(3*) that spirit which disputed
 its ground in the West with the victorious armies of Rome, and
 baffled the attempts of the Persian monarchs to comprehend the
 villages of Greece within the bounds of their extensive dominion.
     The great and striking diversities which obtain betwixt the
 inhabitants of climates far removed from each other, are, like
 the varieties of other animals in different regions, easily
 observed. The horse and the raindeer are just emblems of the Arab
 and the Laplander: the native of Arabia, like the animal for
 whose race his country is famed, whether wild in the woods, or
 tutored by art, is lively, active, and fervent in the exercise on
 which he is bent. This race of men, in their rude state, fly to
 the desert for freedom, and in roving bands alarm the frontiers
 of empire, and strike a terror in the province to which their
 moving encampments advance.(4*) When roused by the prospect of
 conquest, or disposed to act on a plan, they spread their
 dominion, and their system of imagination, over mighty tracts of
 the earth: when possessed of property and of settlement, they set
 the example of a lively invention, and superior ingenuity, in the
 practice of arts, and the study of science, The Laplander, on the
 contrary, like the associate of his climate, is hardy,
 indefatigable, and patient of famine; dull rather than tame;
 serviceable in a particular tract; and incapable of change. Whole
 nations continue from age to age in the same condition, and, with
 immoveable phlegm, submit to the appellations of Dane, of Swede,
 or of Muscovite, according to the land they inhabit; and suffer
 their country to be severed like a common, by the line on which
 those nations have traced their limits of empire.
     It is not in the extremes alone that these varieties of
 genius may be clearly distinguished. Their continual change keeps
 pace with the variations of climate with which we suppose them
 connected: and though certain degrees of capacity, penetration,
 and ardour, are not the lot of entire nations, nor the vulgar
 properties of any people; yet their unequal frequency, and
 unequal measure, in different countries, are sufficiently
 manifest from the manners, the tone of conversation, the talent
 for business, amusement, and literary composition, which
 predominate in each.
     It is to the Southern nations of Europe, both ancient and
 modern, that we owe the invention and the embellishment of that
 mythology, and those early traditions, which continue to furnish
 the materials of fancy, and the field of poetic allusion. To them
 we owe the romantic tales of chivalry, as well as the subsequent
 models of a more rational style, by which the heart and the
 imagination are kindled, and the understanding informed.
     The fruits of industry have abounded most in the North, and
 the study of science has here received its most solid
 improvements: the efforts of imagination and sentiment were most
 frequent and most successful in the South. While the shores of
 the Baltic became famed for the studies of Copernicus, Tycho
 Brahe, and Kepler, those of the Mediterranean were celebrated for
 giving birth to men of genius in all its variety, and for having
 abounded with poets and historians, as well as with men of
 science.
     On one side, learning took its rise from the heart and the
 fancy; on the other, it is still confined to the judgement and
 the memory. A faithful detail of public transactions, with little
 discernment of their comparative importance; the treaties and the
 claims of nations, the births and genealogies of princes, are, in
 the literature of Northern nations, amply preserved; while the
 lights of the understanding, and the feelings of the heart, are
 suffered to perish. The history of the human character; the
 interesting memoir, founded no less on the careless proceedings
 of a private life, than on the formal transactions of a public
 station; the ingenious pleasantry, the piercing ridicule, the
 tender, pathetic, or the elevated strain of elocution, have been
 confined in modern as well as ancient times, with a few
 exceptions, to the same latitudes with the fig and the vine.
     These diversities of natural genius, if real, must have great
 part of their foundation in the animal frame: and it has been
 often observed, that the vine flourishes, where, to quicken the
 ferments of the human blood, its aids are the least required.
 While spirituous liquors are, among Southern nations, from a
 sense of their ruinous effects, prohibited; or from a love of
 decency, and the possession of a temperament sufficiently warm,
 not greatly desired; they carry in the North a peculiar charm,
 while they awaken the mind, and give a taste of that lively fancy
 and ardour of passion, which the climate is found to deny.
     The melting desires, or the fiery passions, which in one
 climate take place between the sexes, are in another changed into
 a sober consideration, or a patience of mutual disgust. This
 change is remarked in crossing the Mediterranean, in following
 the course of the Missisippi, in ascending the mountains of
 Caucasus, and in passing from the Alps and the Pyrenees to the
 shores of the Baltic.
     The female sex domineers on the frontier of Louisiana, by the
 double engine of superstition, and of passion. They are slaves
 among the native inhabitants of Canada, and chiefly valued for
 the toils they endure, and the domestic service they yield.(5*)
     The burning ardours, and the torturing jealousies, of the
 seraglio and the haram, which have reigned so long in Asia and
 Africa, and which, in the Southern parts of Europe, have scarcely
 given way to the difference of religion and civil establishments,
 are found, however, with an abatement of heat in the climate, to
 be more easily changed, in one latitude, into a temporary passion
 which ingrosses the mind, without enfeebling it, and which
 excites to romantic atchievements: by a farther progress to the
 North, it is changed into a spirit of gallantry, which employs
 the wit and the fancy more than the heart; which prefers intrigue
 to enjoyment; and substitutes affectation and vanity, where
 sentiment and desire have failed. As it departs from the sun, the
 same passion is further composed into a habit of domestic
 connection, or frozen into a state of insensibility, under which
 the sexes at freedom scarcely chuse to unite their society.
     These variations of temperament and character, do not indeed
 correspond with the number of degrees that are measured from the
 equator to the pole; nor does the temperature of the air itself
 depend on the latitude. Varieties of soil and position, the
 distance or neighbourhood of the sea, are known to affect the
 atmosphere, and may have signal effects in composing the animal
 frame.
     The climates of America, though taken under the same
 parallel, are observed to differ from those of Europe. There,
 extensive marshes, great lakes, aged, decayed, and crouded
 forests, with the other circumstances that mark an uncultivated
 country, are supposed to replenish the air with heavy and noxious
 vapours, that give a double asperity to the winter, and, during
 many months, by the frequency and continuance of fogs, snow, and
 frost, carry the inconveniencies of the frigid zone far into the
 temperate. The Samoiede and the Laplander, however, have their
 counterpart, though on a lower latitude, on the shores of
 America: the Canadian and the Iroquois bear a resemblance to the
 ancient inhabitants of the middling climates of Europe: the
 Mexican, like the Asiatic of India, being addicted to pleasure,
 was sunk in effeminacy; and in the neighbourhood of the wild and
 the free, had suffered to be raised on his weakness, a
 domineering superstition, and a permanent fabric of despotical
 government.
     Great part of Tartary lies under the same parallels with
 Greece, Italy, and Spain; but the climates are found to be
 different; and while the shores, not only of the Mediterranean,
 but even those of the Atlantic, are favoured with a moderate
 change and vicissitude of seasons, the eastern parts of Europe,
 and the northern continent of Asia, are afflicted with all their
 extremes. In one season, we are told, that the plagues of an
 ardent summer reach almost to the frozen sea; and that the
 inhabitant is obliged to screen himself from noxious vermin in
 the same clouds of smoke in which he must, at a different time of
 the year, take shelter from the rigours of cold. When winter
 returns, the transition is rapid, and with an asperity almost
 equal in every latitude, lays waste the face of the earth, from
 the northern confines of Siberia, to the descents of Mount
 Caucasus and the frontier of India.
     With this unequal distribution of climate, by which the lot,
 as well as the national character, of the Northern Asiatic may be
 deemed inferior to that of Europeans who lie under the same
 parallels, a similar gradation of temperament and spirit,
 however, has been observed, in following the meridian on either
 tract; and the Southern Tartar has over the Tonguses and the
 Samoiede, the same pre-eminence that certain nations of Europe
 are known to possess over their Northern neighbours, in
 situations more advantageous to both.
     The Southern hemisphere scarcely offers a subject of like
 observation. The temperate zone is there still undiscovered, or
 is only known in two promontories, the Cape of Good Hope, and
 Cape Horn, which stretch into moderate latitudes on that side of
 the line. But the savage of South America, notwithstanding the
 interposition of the nations of Peru and of Mexico, is found to
 resemble his counterpart on the North; and the Hottentot, in many
 things, the barbarian of Europe: he is tenacious of freedom, has
 rudiments of policy, and a national vigour, which serve to
 distinguish his race from the other African tribes, who are
 exposed to the more vertical rays of the sun.
     While we have, in these observations, only thrown out what
 must present itself on the most cursory view of the history of
 mankind, or what may be presumed from the mere obscurity of some
 nations, who inhabit great tracts of the earth, as well as from
 the lustre of others, we are still unable to explain the manner
 in which climate may affect the temperament, or foster the
 genius, of its inhabitant.
     That the temper of the heart, and the intellectual operations
 of the mind, are, in some measure, dependent on the state of the
 animal organs, is well known from experience. Men differ from
 themselves in sickness and in health; under a change of diet, of
 air, and of exercise: but we are, even in these familiar
 instances, at a loss how to connect the cause with its supposed
 effect: and though climate, by including a variety of such
 causes, may, by some regular influence, affect the characters of
 men, we can never hope to explain the manner of those influences
 till we have understood what probably we shall never understand,
 the structure of those finer organs with which the operations of
 the soul are connected.
     When we point out, in the situation of a people,
 circumstances which, by determining their pursuits, regulate
 their habits, and their manner of life; and when, instead of
 referring to the supposed physical source of their dispositions,
 we assign their inducements to a determinate conduct; in this we
 speak of effects and of causes whose connection is more
 familiarly known. We can understand, for instance, why a race of
 men like the Samoiede, confined, during great part of the year,
 to darkness, or retired into caverns, should differ, in their
 manners and apprehensions, from those who are at liberty in every
 season; or who, instead of seeking relief from the extremities of
 cold, are employed in search of precautions against the
 oppressions of a burning sun. Fire and exercise are the remedies
 of cold; repose and shade the securities from heat. The Hollander
 is laborious and industrious in Europe; he becomes more languid
 and slothful in India.(6*)
     Great extremities, either of heat or cold, are, perhaps, in a
 moral view, equally unfavourable to the active genius of mankind,
 and by presenting alike unsuperable difficulties to be overcome,
 or strong inducements to indolence and sloth, equally prevent the
 first applications of ingenuity, or limit their progress. Some
 intermediate degrees of inconvenience in the situation, at once
 excite the spirit, and, with the hopes of success, encourage its
 efforts. 'It is in the least favourable situations,' says Mr
 Rousseau, 'that arts have flourished the most. I could show them
 in Egypt, as they spread with the overflowing of the Nile; and in
 Africa, as they mounted up to the clouds, from a rocky soil and
 from barren sands; while on the fertile banks of the Eurotas,
 they were not able to fasten their roots.'
     Where mankind from the first subsist by toil, and in the
 midst of difficulties, the defects of their situation are
 supplied by industry. and while dry, tempting, and healthful
 lands are left uncultivated,(7*) the pestilent marsh is drained
 with great labour, and the Sea is fenced off with mighty
 barriers, the materials and the costs of which, the soil to be
 gained can scarcely afford, or repay. Harbours are opened, and
 crouded with shipping, where vessels of burden, if they are not
 constructed with a view to the situation, have not water to
 float. Elegant and magnificent edifices are raised on foundations
 of slime; and all the conveniencies of human life are made to
 abound, where nature does not seem to have prepared a reception
 for men. It is in vain to expect, that the residence of arts and
 commerce should be determined by the possession of natural
 advantages. Men do more when they have certain difficulties to
 surmount, than when they have supposed blessings to enjoy: and
 the shade of the barren oak and the pine are more favourable to
 the genius of mankind, than that of the palm or the tamarind.
     Among the advantages which enable nations to run the career
 of policy, as well as of arts, it may be expected, from the
 observations already made, that we should reckon every
 circumstance which enables them to divide and to maintain
 themselves in distinct and independent communities. The society
 and concourse of other men, are not more necessary to form the
 individual, than the rivalship and competition of nations are to
 invigorate the principles of political life in a state. Their
 wars, and their treaties, their mutual jealousies, and the
 establishments which they devise with a view to each other,
 constitute more than half the occupations of mankind, and furnish
 materials for their greatest and most improving exertions. For
 this reason, clusters of islands, a continent divided by many
 natural barriers, great rivers, ridges of mountains, and arms of
 the sea, are best fitted for becoming the nursery of independent
 and respectable nations. The distinction of states being clearly
 maintained, a principle of political life is established in every
 division, and the capital of every district, like the heart in an
 animal body, communicates with ease the vital blood and the
 national spirit to its members.
     The most respectable nations have always been found where at
 least one part of the frontier has been washed by the sea. This
 barrier, perhaps the strongest of all in the times of barbarity,
 does not, however, even then supersede the cares of a national
 defence; and in the advanced state of arts, gives the greatest
 scope and facility to commerce.
     Thriving and independent nations were accordingly scattered
 on the shores of the Pacific and the Atlantic. They surrounded
 the Red sea, the Mediterranean, and the Baltic; while, a few
 tribes excepted, who retire among the mountains bordering on
 India and Persia, or who have found some rude establishment among
 the creeks and the shores of the Caspian and the Euxine, there is
 scarcely a people in the vast continent of Asia who deserves the
 name of a nation. The unbounded plain is traversed at large by
 hordes, who are in perpetual motion, or who are displaced and
 harassed by their mutual hostilities. Although they are never
 perhaps actually blended together in the course of hunting, or in
 the search of pasture, they cannot bear one great distinction of
 nations, which is taken from the territory, and which is deeply
 impressed by an affection to the native seat. They move in
 troops, without the arrangement or the concert of nations; they
 become easy accessions to every new empire among themselves, or
 to the Chinese and the Muscovite, with whom they hold a traffic
 for the means of subsistence, and the materials of pleasure.
     Where a happy system of nations is formed, they do not rely
 for the continuance of their separate names, and for that of
 their political independence, on the barriers erected by nature.
 Mutual jealousies lead to the maintenance of a balance of power;
 and this principle, more than the Rhine and the Ocean, than the
 Alps and the Pyrenees in modern Europe; more than the straits of
 Thermopylae, the mountains of Thrace, or the bays of Salamine and
 Corinth in ancient Greece; tended to prolong the separation, to
 which the inhabitants of these happy climates have owed their
 felicity as nations, the lustre of their fame, and their civil
 accomplishments.
     If we mean to pursue the history of civil society, our
 attention must be chiefly directed to such examples, and we must
 here bid farewel to those regions of the earth, on which our
 species, by the effects of situation or climate, appear to be
 restrained in their national pursuits, or inferior in the powers
 of the mind.
 
 Section II
 
 The History of Subordination
 
 We have hitherto observed mankind, either united together on
 terms of equality, or disposed to admit of a subordination
 founded merely on the voluntary respect and attachment which they
 paid to their leaders; but, in both cases, without any concerted
 plan of government, or system of laws.
     The savage, whose fortune is comprised in his cabin, his fur,
 and his arms, is satisfied with that provision, and with that
 degree of security, he himself can procure. He perceives, in
 treating with his equal, no subject of discussion that should be
 referred to the decision of a judge; nor does he find in any hand
 the badges of magistracy, or the ensigns of a perpetual command.
     The barbarian, though induced by his admiration of personal
 qualities, the lustre of a heroic race, or a superiority of
 fortune, to follow the banners of a leader, and to act a
 subordinate part in his tribe, knows not, that what he performs
 from choice, is to be made a subject of obligation. He acts from
 affections unacquainted with forms; and when provoked, or when
 engaged in disputes, he recurs to the sword, as the ultimate
 means of decision, in all questions of right.
     Human affairs, in the mean time, continue their progress.
 What was in one generation a propensity to herd with the species,
 becomes, in the ages which follow, a principle of national union.
 What was originally an alliance for common defence, becomes a
 concerted plan of political force; the care of subsistence
 becomes an anxiety for accumulating wealth, and the foundation of
 commercial arts.
     Mankind, in following the present sense of their minds, in
 striving to remove inconveniencies, or to gain apparent and
 contiguous advantages, arrive at ends which even their
 imagination could not anticipate, and pass on, like other
 animals, in the track of their nature, without perceiving its
 end. He who first said, 'I will appropriate this field: I will
 leave it to my heirs;' did not perceive, that he was laying the
 foundation of civil laws and political establishments. He who
 first ranged himself under a leader, did not perceive, that he
 was setting the example of a permanent subordination, under the
 pretence of which, the rapacious were to seize his possessions,
 and the arrogant to lay claim to his service.
     Men, in general, are sufficiently disposed to occupy
 themselves in forming projects and schemes: but he who would
 scheme and project for others, will find an opponent in every
 person who is disposed to scheme for himself. Like the winds,
 that come we know not whence, and blow whithersoever they list,
 the forms of society are derived from an obscure and distant
 origin; they arise, long before the date of philosophy, from the
 instincts, not from the speculations, of men. The croud of
 mankind, are directed in their establishments and measures, by
 the circumstances in which they are placed; and seldom are turned
 from their way, to follow the plan of any single projector.
     Every step and every movement of the multitude, even in what
 are termed enlightened ages, are made with equal blindness to the
 future; and nations stumble upon establishments, which are indeed
 the result of human action, but not the execution of any human
 design.(8*) If Cromwell said, That a man never mounts higher,
 than when he knows not whither he is going; it may with more
 reason be affirmed of communities, that they admit of the
 greatest revolutions where no change is intended, and that the
 most refined politicians do not always know whither they are
 leading the state by their projects.
     If we listen to the testimony of modern history, and to that
 of the most authentic parts of the ancient; if we attend to the
 practice of nations in every quarter of the world, and in every
 condition, whether that of the barbarian or the polished, we
 shall find very little reason to retract this assertion. No
 constitution is formed by concert, no government is copied from a
 plan. The members of a small state contend for equality; the
 members of a greater, find themselves classed in a certain manner
 that lays a foundation for monarchy. They proceed from one form
 of government to another, by easy transitions, and frequently
 under old names adopt a new constitution. The seeds of every form
 are lodged in human nature; they spring up and ripen with the
 season. The prevalence of a particular species is often derived
 from an imperceptible ingredient mingled in the soil.
     We are therefore to receive, with caution, the traditionary
 histories of ancient legislators, and founders of states. Their
 names have long been celebrated; their supposed plans have been
 admired; and what were probably the consequences of an early
 situation, is, in every instance, considered as an effect of
 design. An author and a work, like cause and effect, are
 perpetually coupled together. This is the simplest form under
 which we can consider the establishment of nations: and we
 ascribe to a previous design, what came to be known only by
 experience, what no human wisdom could foresee, and what, without
 the concurring humour and disposition of his age, no authority
 could enable an individual to execute.
     If men, during ages of extensive reflection, and employed in
 the search of improvement, are wedded to their institutions; and,
 labouring under many acknowledged inconveniencies, cannot break
 loose from the trammels of custom; what shall we suppose their
 humour to have been in the times of Romulus and Lycurgus? They
 were not surely more disposed to embrace the schemes of
 innovators, or to shake off the impressions of habit: they were
 not more pliant and ductile, when their knowledge was less; not
 more capable of refinement, when their minds were more
 circumscribed.
     We imagine, perhaps, that rude nations must have so strong a
 sense of the defects under which they labour, and be so conscious
 that reformations are requisite in their manners, that they must
 be ready to adopt, with joy, every plan of improvement, and to
 receive every plausible proposal with implicit compliance. And we
 are thus inclined to believe, that the harp of Orpheus could
 effect, in one age, what the eloquence of Plato could not produce
 in another. We mistake, however, the characteristic of simple
 ages: mankind then appear to feel the fewest defects, and are
 then least desirous to enter on reformations.
     The reality, in the mean time, of certain establishments at
 Rome and at Sparta, cannot be disputed: but it is probable, that
 the government of both these states took its rise from the
 situation and genius of the people, not from the projects of
 single men; that the celebrated warrior and statesman, who are
 considered as the founders of those nations, only acted a
 superior part among numbers who were disposed to the same
 institutions; and that they left to posterity a renown, pointing
 them out as the inventors of many practices which had been
 already in use, and which helped to form their own manners and
 genius, as well as those of their countrymen.
     It has been formerly observed, that, in many particulars, the
 customs of simple nations coincide with what is ascribed to the
 invention of early statesmen; that the model of republican
 government, the senate, and the assembly of the people; that even
 the equality of property, or the community of goods, were not
 reserved to the invention or contrivance of singular men. If we
 consider Romulus as the founder of the Roman state, certainly he
 who killed his brother that he might reign alone, did not desire
 to come under restraints from the controuling power of the
 senate, nor to refer the councils of his sovereignty to the
 decision of a collective body. Love of dominion is, by its
 nature, averse to constraint; and this chieftain, like every
 leader in a rude age, probably found a class of men ready to
 intrude on his councils, and without whom he could not proceed.
 He met with occasions, On which, as at the sound of a trumpet,
 the body of the people assembled, and took resolutions, which any
 individual might in vain dispute, or attempt to controul; and
 Rome, which commenced on the general plan of every artless
 society, found lasting improvements in the pursuit of temporary
 expedients, and digested her political frame in adjusting the
 pretensions of parties which arose in the state.
     Mankind, in very early ages of society, learn to covet
 riches, and to admire distinction: they have avarice and
 ambition, and are occasionally led by them to depredation and
 conquest: but in their ordinary conduct, these motives are
 balanced or restrained by other habits and other pursuits; by
 sloth, or intemperance; by personal attachments, or personal
 animosities; which mislead from the attention to interest. These
 circumstances render mankind, at times, remiss or outrageous:
 they prove the source of civil peace or disorder, but disqualify
 those who are actuated by them, from maintaining any fixed
 usurpation; slavery and rapine are first threatened from abroad,
 and war, either offensive or defensive, is the great business of
 every tribe. The enemy occupy their thoughts; they have no
 leisure for domestic dissensions. It is the desire of every
 separate community, however, to secure itself; and in proportion
 as it gains this object, by strengthening its barrier, by
 weakening its enemy, or by procuring allies, the individual at
 home bethinks him of what he may gain or lose for himself: the
 leader is disposed to enlarge the advantages which belong to his
 station; the follower becomes jealous of rights which are open to
 incroachment; and parties who united before, from affection and
 habit, or from a regard to their common preservation, disagree in
 supporting their several claims to precedence or profit.
     When the animosities of faction are thus awakened at home,
 and the pretensions of freedom are opposed to those of dominion,
 the members of every society find a new scene upon which to exert
 their activity. They had quarrelled, perhaps, on points of
 interest; they had balanced between different leaders; but they
 had never united as citizens, to withstand the encroachments of
 sovereignty, or to maintain their common rights as a people. If
 the prince, in this contest, finds numbers to support, as well as
 to oppose his pretensions, the sword which was whetted against
 foreign enemies, may be pointed at the bosom of fellow-subjects,
 and every interval of peace from abroad, be filled with domestic
 war. The sacred names of Liberty, Justice, and Civil Order, are
 made to resound in public assemblies; and, during the absence of
 other alarms, give a society, within itself, an abundant subject
 of ferment and animosity.
     If what is related of the little principalities which, in
 ancient times, were formed in Greece, in Italy, and over all
 Europe, agrees with the character we have given of mankind under
 the first impressions of property, of interest, and of hereditary
 distinctions; the seditions and domestic wars which followed in
 those very states, the expulsion of their kings, or the questions
 which arose concerning the prerogatives of the sovereign, or
 privilege of the subject, are agreeable to the representation
 which we now give of the first step toward political
 establishment, and the desire of a legal constitution.
     What this constitution may be in its earliest form, depends
 on a variety of circumstances in the condition of nations: It
 depends on the extent of the principality in its rude state; on
 the degree of disparity to which mankind had submitted before
 they began to dispute its abuses: it depends likewise on what we
 term accidents, the personal character of an individual, or the
 events of a war.
     Every community is originally a small one. That propensity by
 which mankind at first unite, is not the principle from which
 they afterwards act in extending the limits of empire. Small
 tribes, where they are not assembled by common objects of
 conquest or safety, are even averse to a coalition. If, like the
 real or fabulous confederacy of the Greeks for the destruction of
 Troy, many nations combine in pursuit of a single object, they
 easily separate again, and act anew on the maxims of rival
 states.
     There is, perhaps, a certain national extent, within which
 the passions of men are easily communicated from one, or a few,
 to the whole; and there are certain numbers of men who can be
 assembled, and act in a body. If, while the society is not
 enlarged beyond this dimension, and while its members are easily
 assembled, political contentions arise, the state seldom fails to
 proceed on republican maxims, and to establish democracy. In most
 rude principalities, the leader derived his prerogative from the
 lustre of his race, and from the voluntary attachment of his
 tribe: the people he commanded, were his friends, his subjects,
 and his troops. If we suppose, upon any change in their manners,
 that they cease to revere his dignity, that they pretend to
 equality among themselves, or are seized with a jealousy of his
 assuming too much, the foundations of his power are already
 withdrawn. When the voluntary subject becomes refractory; when
 considerable parties, or the collective body, chuse to act for
 themselves; the small kingdom, like that of Athens, becomes of
 course a republic.
     The changes of condition, and of manners, which, in the
 progress of mankind, raise up to nations a leader and a prince,
 create, at the same time, a nobility, and a variety of ranks, who
 have, in a subordinate degree, their claim to distinction.
 Superstition, too, may create an order of men, who, under the
 title of priesthood, engage in the pursuit of a separate
 interest; who, by their union and firmness as a body, and by
 their incessant ambition, deserve to be reckoned in the list of
 pretenders to power. These different orders of men are the
 elements of whose mixture the political body is generally formed;
 each draws to its side some part from the mass of the people. The
 people themselves are a party upon occasion; and numbers of men,
 however classed and distinguished, become, by their jarring
 pretensions and separate views, mutual interruptions and checks;
 and have, by bringing to the national councils the maxims and
 apprehensions of a particular order, and by guarding a particular
 interest, a share in adjusting or preserving the political form
 of the state.
     The pretensions of any particular order, if not checked by
 some collateral power, would terminate in tyranny; those of a
 prince, in despotism; those of a nobility or priesthood, in the
 abuses of aristocracy; of a populace, in the confusions of
 anarchy. These terminations, as they are never the professed, so
 are they seldom even the disguised, object of party: but the
 measures which any party pursues, if suffered to prevail, will
 lead, by degrees, to every extreme.
     In their way to the ascendant they endeavour to gain, and in
 the midst of interruptions which opposite interests mutually
 give, liberty may have a permanent or a transient existence; and
 the constitution may bear a form and a character as various as
 the casual combination of such multiplied parts can effect.
     To bestow on communities some degree of political freedom, it
 is perhaps sufficient, that their members, either singly, or as
 they are involved with their several orders, should insist on
 their rights; that under republics, the citizen should either
 maintain his own equality with firmness, or restrain the ambition
 of his fellow-citizen within moderate bounds: that under
 monarchy, men of every rank should maintain the honours of their
 private or their public stations; and sacrifice, neither to the
 impositions of a court, nor to the claims of a populace, those
 dignities which are destined, in some measure, independent of
 fortune, to give stability to the throne, and to procure a
 respect to the subject.
     Amidst the contentions of party, the interests of the public,
 even the maxims of justice and candour, are sometimes forgotten;
 and yet those fatal consequences which such a measure of
 corruption seems to portend, do not unavoidably follow. The
 public interest is often secure, not because individuals are
 disposed to regard it as the end of their conduct, but because
 each, in his place, is determined to preserve his own. Liberty is
 maintained by the continued differences and oppositions of
 numbers, not by their concurring zeal in behalf of equitable
 government. In free states, therefore, the wisest laws are never,
 perhaps, dictated by the interest and spirit of any order of men:
 they are moved, they are opposed, or amended, by different hands;
 and come at last to express that medium and composition which
 contending parties have forced one another to adopt.
     When we consider the history of mankind in this view, we
 cannot be at a loss for the causes which, in small communities,
 threw the balance on the side of democracy; which, in states more
 enlarged in respect to territory and numbers of people, gave the
 ascendant to monarchy; and which, in a variety of conditions and
 of different ages, enabled mankind to blend and unite the
 characters of different forms; and, instead of any of the simple
 constitutions we have mentioned,(9*) to exhibit a medley of all.
     In emerging from a state of rudeness and simplicity, men must
 be expected to act from that spirit of equality, or moderate
 subordination, to which they have been accustomed. When crouded
 together in cities, or within the compass of a small territory,
 they act by contagious passions, and every individual feels a
 degree of importance proportioned to his figure in the croud, and
 the smallness of its numbers. The pretenders to power and
 dominion appear in too familiar a light to impose upon the
 multitude, and they have no aids at their call, by which they can
 bridle the refractory humours of a people who resist their
 pretensions. Theseus, King of Attica, we are told, assembled the
 inhabitants of its twelve cantons into one city. In this he took
 an effectual method to unit into one democracy, what were before
 the separate members of his monarchy, and to hasten the downfall
 of the regal power.
     The monarch of an extensive territory has many advantages in
 maintaining his station. Without any grievance to his subjects,
 he can support the magnificence of a royal estate, and dazzle the
 imagination of his people, by that very wealth which themselves
 have bestowed. He can employ the inhabitants of one district
 against those of another; and while the passions that lead to
 mutiny and rebellion, can at any one time seize only on a part of
 his subjects, he feels himself strong in the possession of a
 general authority. Even the distance at which he resides from
 many of those who receive his commands, augments the mysterious
 awe and respect which are paid to his government.
     With these different tendencies, accident and corruption,
 however, joined to a variety of circumstances, may throw
 particular states from their bias, and produce exceptions to
 every general rule. This has actually happened in some of the
 later principalities of Greece, and modern Italy, in Sweden,
 Poland, and the German empire. But the united states of the
 Netherlands, and the Swiss cantons, are perhaps the most
 extensive communities, which maintaining the union of nations,
 have, for any considerable time, resisted the tendency to
 monarchical government; and Sweden is the only instance of a
 republic established in a great kingdom on the ruins of monarchy.
     The sovereign of a petty district, or a single city, when not
 supported, as in modern Europe, by the contagion of monarchical
 manners, holds the sceptre by a precarious tenure, and is
 perpetually alarmed by the spirit of mutiny in his people, is
 guided by jealousy, and supports himself by severity, prevention,
 and force.
     The popular and aristocratical powers in a great nation, as
 in the case of Germany and Poland, may meet with equal difficulty
 in maintaining their pretensions; and in order to avoid their
 danger on the side of kingly usurpation, are obliged to withhold
 from the supreme magistrate even the necessary trust of an
 executive power.
     The states of Europe, in the manner of their first
 settlement, laid the foundations of monarchy, and were prepared
 to unite under regular and extensive governments. If the Greeks,
 whose progress at home terminated in the establishment of so many
 independent republics, had under Agamemnon effected a conquest
 and settlement in Asia, it is probable, that they might have
 furnished an example of the same kind. But the original
 inhabitants of any country, forming many separate cantons, come
 by slow degrees to that coalition and union into which conquering
 tribes are, in effecting their conquests, or in securing their
 possessions, hurried at once. Caesar encountered some hundreds of
 independent nations in Gaul, whom even their common danger did
 not sufficiently unite. The German invaders, who settled in the
 lands of the Romans, made, in the same district, a number of
 separate establishments, but far more extensive than what the
 ancient Gauls, by their conjunctions and treaties, or in the
 result of their wars, could after many ages have reached.
     The seeds of great monarchies, and the roots of extensive
 dominion, were every where planted with the colonies that divided
 the Roman empire. We have no exact account of the numbers, who,
 with a seeming concert, continued, during some ages, to invade
 and to seize this tempting prize. Where they expected resistance,
 they endeavoured to muster up a proportionable force; and when
 they proposed to settle, entire nations removed to share in the
 spoil. Scattered over an extensive province, where they could not
 be secure, without maintaining their union, they continued to
 acknowledge the leader under whom they had fought; and, like an
 army sent by divisions into separate stations, were prepared to
 assemble whenever occasion should require their united operations
 or counsels.
     Every separate party had its post assigned, and every
 subordinate chieftain his possessions, from which he was to
 provide his own subsistence, and that of his followers. The model
 of government was taken from that of a military subordination,
 and a fief was the temporary pay of an officer proportioned to
 his rank.(10*) There was a class of the people destined to
 military service, another to labour, and to cultivate lands for
 the benefit of their masters. The officer improved his tenure by
 degrees, first changing a temporary grant into a tenure for his
 life; and this also, upon the observance of certain conditions,
 into a grant including his heirs.
     The rank of the nobles became hereditary in every quarter,
 and formed a powerful and permanent order of men in every state.
 While they held the people in servitude, they disputed the claims
 of their sovereign; they withdrew their attendance upon occasion,
 or turned their arms against him. They formed a strong and
 insurmountable barrier against a general despotism in the state;
 but they were themselves, by means of their warlike retainers,
 the tyrants of every little district, and prevented the
 establishment of order, or any regular applications of law. They
 took the advantage of weak reigns or minorities, to push their
 incroachments on the sovereign; or having made the monarchy
 elective, they by successive treaties and stipulations, at every
 election, limited or undermined the monarchical power. The
 prerogatives of the prince have been, in some instances, as in
 that of the German empire in particular, reduced to a mere title;
 and the national union itself preserved in the observance only of
 a few insignificant formalities.
     Where the contest of the sovereign, and of his vassals, under
 hereditary and ample prerogatives annexed to the crown, had a
 different issue, the feudal lordships were gradually stript of
 their powers, the nobles were reduced to the state of subjects,
 and obliged to hold their honours, and exercise their
 jurisdictions, in a dependence on the prince. It was his supposed
 interest to reduce them to a state of equal subjection with the
 people, and to extend his own authority, by rescuing the labourer
 and the dependent from the oppressions of their immediate
 superiors.
     In this project the princes of Europe have variously
 succeeded. While they protected the people, and thereby
 encouraged the practice of commercial and lucrative arts, they
 paved the way for despotism in the state; and with the same
 policy by which they relieved the subject from many oppressions,
 they increased the powers of the crown.
     But where the people had by the constitution a representative
 in the government, and a head, under which they could avail
 themselves of the wealth they acquired, and of the sense of their
 personal importance, this policy turned against the crown; it
 formed a new power to restrain the prerogative, to establish the
 government of law, and to exhibit a spectacle new in the history
 of mankind; monarchy mixed with republic, and extensive
 territory, governed, during some ages, without military force.
     Such were the steps by which the nations of Europe have
 arrived at their present establishments: in some instances, they
 have come to the possession of legal constitutions; in others, to
 the exercise of a mitigated despotism; or continue to struggle
 with the tendency which they severally have to these different
 extremes.
     The progress of empire, in the early ages of Europe,
 threatened to be rapid, and to bury the independent spirit of
 nations in that grave which the Ottoman conquerors found for
 themselves; and for the wretched race they had vanquished. The
 Romans were led by slow degrees to extend the limits of their
 empire; every new acquisition was the result of a tedious war,
 and required the sending of colonies, and a variety of measures,
 to secure any new possession. But the feudal superior being
 animated, from the moment he had gained an establishment, with a
 desire of extending his territory, and of enlarging the list of
 his vassals, made frequent annexation of new provinces, merely by
 bestowing investiture, and received independent states, without
 any material innovation in the form of their policy, as the
 subjects of his growing dominion.
     Separate principalities were, like the parts of an engine,
 ready to be joined, and, like the materials of a building, ready
 to be erected. They were in the result of their struggles put
 together or taken asunder with facility. The independence of weak
 states was preserved only by the mutual jealousies of the strong,
 or by the general attention of all to maintain a balance of
 power.
     The happy system of policy on which European states have
 proceeded in preserving this balance; the degree of moderation
 which is, in adjusting their treaties, become habitual even to
 victorious and powerful monarchies, does honour to mankind, and
 may give hopes of a lasting felicity to be derived from a
 prepossession, never, perhaps, equally strong in any former
 period, or among any number of nations, that the first conquering
 people will ruin themselves, as well as their rivals.
     It is in such states, perhaps, as in a fabric of a large
 dimension, that we can perceive most distinctly the several parts
 of which a political body consists; and observe that concurrence
 or opposition of interests, which serve to unite or to separate
 different orders of men, and lead them, by maintaining their
 several claims, to establish a variety of political forms. The
 smallest republics, however, consist of parts similar to these,
 and of members who are actuated by a similar spirit. They furnish
 examples of government diversified by the casual combinations of
 parties, and by the different advantages with which those parties
 engage in the conflict.
     In every society there is a casual subordination, independent
 of its formal establishment, and frequently adverse to its
 constitution. While the administration and the people speak the
 language of a particular form, and seem to admit no pretensions
 to power, without a legal nomination in one instance, or without
 the advantage of hereditary honours in another, this casual
 subordination, possibly arising from the distribution of
 property, or from some other circumstance that bestows unequal
 degrees of influence, gives the state its tone, and fixes its
 character.
     The plebeian order at Rome having been long considered as of
 an inferior condition, and excluded from the higher offices of
 magistracy, had sufficient force, as a body, to get this
 invidious distinction removed; but the individual still acting
 under the impressions of a subordinate rank, gave in every
 competition his suffrage to a patrician, whose protection he had
 experienced, and whose personal authority he felt. By this means,
 the ascendency of the patrician families was, for a certain
 period, as regular as it could be made by the avowed maxims of
 aristocracy; but the higher offices of state being gradually
 shared by plebeians, the effects of former distinctions were
 prevented or weakened. The laws that were made to adjust the
 pretensions of different orders were easily eluded. The populace
 became a faction, and their alliance was the surest road to
 dominion. Clodius, by a pretended adoption into a plebeian
 family, was qualified to become tribune of the people; and
 Caesar, by espousing the cause of this faction, made his way to
 usurpation and tyranny.
     In such fleeting and transient scenes, forms of government
 are only modes of proceeding, in which every subsequent age may
 differ from the former. Faction is ever ready to seize all
 occasional advantages; and mankind, when in hazard from any
 party, seldom find a better protection than that of its rival.
 Cato united with Pompey in opposition to Caesar, and guarded
 against nothing so much as that reconciliation of parties, which
 was in effect to be a combination of different leaders against
 the freedom of the republic. This illustrious personage stood
 distinguished in his age like a man among children, and was
 raised above his opponents, as much by the justness of his
 understanding, and the extent of his penetration, as he was by
 the manly fortitude and disinterestedness with which he strove to
 baffle the designs of a vain and childish ambition, that was
 operating to the ruin of mankind.
     Although free constitutions of government seldom or never
 take their rise from the scheme of any single projector, yet are
 they often preserved by the vigilance, activity, and zeal, of
 single men. Happy are they who understand and who chuse this
 object of care; and happy it is for mankind when it is not chosen
 too late. It has been reserved to signalize the lives of a Cato
 or a Brutus, on the eve of fatal revolutions; to foster in secret
 the indignation of Thrasea and Helvidius; and to occupy the
 reflections of speculative men in time of corruption. But even in
 such late and ineffectual examples, it was happy to know, and to
 value, an object which is so important to mankind. The pursuit,
 and the love of it, however unsuccessful, has thrown a lustre on
 human nature.
 
 Section III
 
 Of National Objects in general, and of Establishments and
 Manners, relating to them.
 
     While the mode of subordination is casual, and forms of
 government take their rise, chiefly from the manner in which the
 members of a state have been originally classed, and from a
 variety of circumstances that procure to particular orders of men
 a sway in their country, there are certain objects that claim the
 attention of every government, that lead the apprehensions and
 the reasonings of mankind in every society, and that not only
 furnish an employment to statesmen, but in some measure direct
 the community to those institutions, under the authority of which
 the magistrate holds his power. Such are the national defence,
 the distribution of justice, the preservation and internal
 prosperity of the state. If these objects be neglected, we must
 apprehend that the very scene in which parties contend for power,
 for privilege, or equality, must disappear, and society itself no
 longer exist.
     The consideration due to these objects will be pleaded in
 every public assembly, and will produce, in every political
 Contest, appeals to that common sense and opinion of mankind,
 which, struggling with the private views of individuals, and the
 claims of party, may be considered as the great legislator of
 nations.
     The measures required for the attainment of most national
 objects, are connected together, and must be jointly pursued:
 they are often the same. The force which is prepared for defence
 against foreign enemies, may be likewise employed to keep the
 peace at home: the laws made to secure the rights and liberties
 of the people, may serve as encouragements to population and
 commerce: and every community, without considering how its
 objects may be classed or distinguished by speculative men, is,
 in every instance, obliged to assume or to retain that form which
 is best fitted to preserve its advantages, or to avert its
 misfortunes.
     Nations, however, like private men, have their favourite
 ends, and their principal pursuits, which diversify their
 manners, as well as their establishments. They even attain to the
 same ends by different means; and, like men who make their
 fortune by different professions, retain the habits of their
 principal calling in every condition at which they arrive. The
 Romans became wealthy in pursuing their conquests; and probably,
 for a certain period, increased the numbers of mankind, while
 their disposition to war seemed to threaten the earth with
 desolation. Some modern nations proceed to dominion and
 enlargement on the maxims of commerce; and while they only intend
 to accumulate riches at home, continue to gain an imperial
 ascendant abroad.
     The characters of the warlike and the commercial are
 variously combined: they are formed in different degrees by the
 influence of circumstances that more or less frequently give rise
 to war, and excite the desire of conquest; of circumstances that
 leave a people in quiet to improve their domestic resources, or
 to purchase, by the fruits of their industry, from foreigners,
 what their own soil and their climate deny.
     The members of every community are more or less occupied with
 matters of state, in proportion as their constitution admits them
 to a share in the government, and summons up their attention to
 objects of a public nature. A people are cultivated or unimproved
 in their talents, in proportion as those talents are employed in
 the practice of arts, and in the affairs of society: they are
 improved or corrupted in their manners, in proportion as they are
 encouraged and directed to act on the maxims of freedom and
 justice, or as they are degraded into a state of meanness and
 servitude. But whatever advantages are obtained, or whatever
 evils are avoided, by nations, in any of these important
 respects, are generally considered as mere occasional incidents:
 they are seldom admitted among the objects of policy, or entered
 among the reasons of state.
     We hazard being treated with ridicule, when we require
 political establishments, merely to cultivate the talents of men,
 and to inspire the sentiments of a liberal mind: we must offer
 some motive of interest, or some hopes of external advantage, to
 animate the pursuits, or to direct the measures, of ordinary men.
 They would be brave, ingenious, and eloquent, only from
 necessity, or for the sake of profit: they magnify the uses of
 wealth, population, and the other resources of war; but often
 forget that these are of no consequence without the direction of
 able capacities, and without the supports of a national vigour.
 We may expect, therefore, to find among states the bias to a
 particular policy taken from the regards to public safety; from
 the desire of securing personal freedom, or private property;
 seldom from the consideration of moral effects, or from a view to
 the genius of mankind.
 
 Section IV
 
 Of Population and Wealth
 
     When we imagine what the Romans must have felt when the
 tidings came that the flower of their city had perished at
 Cannae; when we think of what the orator had in his mind when he
 said, 'That the youth among the people was like the spring among
 the seasons;' when we hear of the joy with which the huntsman and
 the warrior is adopted, in America, to sustain the honours of the
 family and the nation; we are made to feel the most powerful
 motives to regard the increase and preservation of our
 fellow-citizens. Interest, affection, and views of policy,
 combine to recommend this object; and it is treated with entire
 neglect only by the tyrant who mistakes his own advantage, by the
 statesman who trifles with the charge committed to his care, or
 by the people who are become corrupted, and who consider their
 fellow-subjects as rivals in interest, and competitors in their
 lucrative pursuits.
     Among rude societies, and among small communities in general,
 who are engaged in frequent struggles and difficulties, the
 preservation and increase of their members is a most important
 object. The American rates his defeat from the numbers of men he
 has lost, or he estimates his victory from the prisoners he has
 made; not from his having remained the master of a field, or from
 his being driven from a ground on which he encountered his enemy.
 A man with whom he can associate in all his pursuits, whom he can
 embrace as his friend; in whom he finds an object to his
 affections, and an aid in his struggles, is to him the most
 precious accession of fortune.
     Even where the friendship of particular men is out of the
 question, the society, being occupied in forming a party that may
 defend itself, and annoy its enemy, finds no object of greater
 moment than the increase of its numbers. Captives who may be
 adopted, or children of either sex who may be reared for the
 public, are accordingly considered as the richest spoil of an
 enemy. The practice of the Romans in admitting the vanquished to
 share in the privileges of their city, the rape of the Sabines,
 and the subsequent coalition with that people, were not singular
 or uncommon examples in the history of mankind. The same policy
 has been followed, and was natural and obvious where-ever the
 strength of a state consisted in the arms of a few, and where men
 were valued in themselves, distinct from the consideration of
 estate or of fortune.
     In rude ages, therefore, while mankind subsist in small
 divisions, it should appear, that if the earth be thinly peopled,
 this defect does not arise from a disregard to numbers on the
 part of states. It is even probable, that the most effectual
 course that could be taken to increase the species, would be, to
 prevent the coalition of nations, and to oblige mankind to act in
 such small bodies as would make the preservation of their numbers
 a principal object of their care. This alone, it is true, would
 not be sufficient: we must probably add the encouragement for
 rearing families, which mankind enjoy under a favourable policy,
 and the means of subsistence which they owe to the practice of
 arts.
     The mother is unwilling to increase her offspring, and is ill
 provided to rear them, where she herself is obliged to undergo
 great hardships in the search of her food. In North America, we
 are told, that she joins to the reserves of a cold or a moderate
 temperament, the abstinencies to which she submits from the
 consideration of this difficulty. In her apprehension, it is
 matter of prudence, and of conscience, to bring one child to the
 condition of feeding on venison, and of following on foot, before
 she will hazard a new burden in travelling the woods.
     In warmer latitudes, by the different temperament, perhaps,
 which the climate bestows, and by a greater facility in procuring
 subsistence, the numbers of mankind increase, while the object
 itself is neglected; and the commerce of the sexes, without any
 concern for population, is made a subject of mere debauch. In
 some places, we are told, it is even made the object of a
 barbarous policy, to defeat or to restrain the intentions of
 nature. In the island of Formosa, the males are prohibited to
 marry before the age of forty; and females, if pregnant before
 the age of thirty-six, have an abortion procured by order of the
 magistrate, who employs a violence that endangers the life of the
 mother, together with that of the child.(11*)
     In China, the permission given to parents to kill or to
 expose their children, was probably meant as a relief from the
 burden of a numerous offspring. But notwithstanding what we hear
 of a practice so repugnant to the human heart, it has not,
 probably, the effects in restraining population, which it seems
 to threaten; but, like many other institutions, has an influence
 the reverse of what it seemed to portend. The parents marry with
 this means of relief in their view, and the children are saved.
     However important the object of population may be held by
 mankind, it will be difficult to find, in the history of civil
 policy, any wise or effectual establishments solely calculated to
 obtain it. The practice of rude or feeble nations is inadequate,
 or cannot surmount the obstacles which are found in their manner
 of life. The growth of industry, the endeavours of men to improve
 their arts, to extend their commerce, to secure their
 possessions, and to establish their rights, are indeed the most
 effectual means to promote population: but they arise from a
 different motive; they arise from regards to interest and
 personal safety. They are intended for the benefit of those who
 exist, not to procure the increase of their numbers.
     It is, in the mean time, of importance to know, that where a
 people are fortunate in their political establishments, and
 successful in the pursuits of industry, their population is
 likely to grow in proportion. Most of the other devices thought
 of for this purpose, only serve to frustrate the expectations of
 mankind, or to mislead their attention.
     In planting a colony, in striving to repair the occasional
 wastes of pestilence or war, the immediate contrivance of
 statesmen may be useful; but if in reasoning on the increase of
 mankind in general, we overlook their freedom, and their
 happiness, our aids to population become weak and ineffectual.
 They only lead us to work on the surface, or to pursue a shadow,
 while we neglect the substantial concern; and in a decaying
 state, make us tamper with palliatives, while the roots of an
 evil are suffered to remain. Octavius revived or inforced the
 laws that related to population at Rome: but it may be said of
 him, and of many sovereigns in a similar situation, that they
 administer the poison, while they are devising the remedy; and
 bring a damp and a palsy on the principles of life, while they
 endeavour, by external applications to the skin, to restore the
 bloom of a decayed and a sickly body.
     It is indeed happy for mankind, that this important object is
 not always dependent on the wisdom of sovereigns, or the policy
 of single men. A people intent on freedom, find for themselves a
 condition in which they may follow the propensities of nature
 with a more signal effect, than any which the councils of state
 could devise. When sovereigns, or projectors, are the supposed
 masters of this subject, the best they can do, is to be cautious
 of hurting an interest they cannot greatly promote, and of making
 breaches they cannot repair.
     'When nations were divided into small territories, and petty
 commonwealths, where each man had his house and his field to
 himself, and each county had its capital free and independent;
 what a happy situation for mankind,' says Mr Hume, 'how
 favourable to industry and agriculture, to marriage and to
 population!' Yet here were probably no schemes of the statesman
 for rewarding the married, or for punishing the single; for
 inviting foreigners to settle, or for prohibiting the departure
 of natives. Every citizen finding a possession secure, and a
 provision for his heirs, was not discouraged by the gloomy fears
 of oppression or want: and where every other function of nature
 was free, that which furnished the nursery could not be
 restrained. Nature has required the powerful to be just; but she
 has not otherwise intrusted the preservation of her works to
 their visionary plans. What fewel can the statesman add to the
 fires of youth? Let him only not smother it, and the effect is
 secure. Where we oppress or degrade mankind with one hand, it is
 vain, like Octavius, to hold out in the other, the baits of
 marriage, or the whip to barrenness. It is vain to invite new
 inhabitants from abroad, while those we already possess are made
 to hold their tenure with uncertainty; and to tremble, not only
 under the prospect of a numerous family, but even under that of a
 precarious and doubtful subsistence for themselves. The arbitrary
 sovereign, who has made this the condition of his subjects, owes
 the remains of his people to the powerful instincts of nature,
 not to any device of his own.
     Men will croud where the situation is tempting, and, in a few
 generations, will people every country to the measure of its
 means of subsistence. They will even increase under circumstances
 that portend a decay. The frequent wars of the Romans, and of
 many a thriving community; even the pestilence, and the market
 for slaves, find their supply, if, without destroying the source,
 the drain become regular; and if an issue is made for the
 offspring, without unsettling the families from which they arise.
 Where a happier provision is made for mankind, the statesman, who
 by premiums to marriage, by allurements to foreigners, or by
 confining the natives at home, apprehends, that he has made the
 numbers of his people to grow, is often like the fly in the
 fable, who admired its success, in turning the wheel, and in
 moving the carriage: he has only accompanied what was already in
 motion; he has dashed with his oar, to hasten the cataract; and
 waved with his fan, to give speed to the winds.
     Projects of mighty settlement, and of sudden population,
 however successful in the end, are always expensive to mankind.
 Above a hundred thousand peasants, we are told, were yearly
 driven, like so many cattle, to Petersburgh, in the first
 attempts to replenish that settlement, and yearly perished for
 want of subsistence.(12*) The Indian only attempts to settle in
 the neighbourhood of the plantain,(13*) and while his family
 increases, he adds a tree to the walk.
     If the plantain, the cocoa, or the palm, were sufficient to
 maintain an inhabitant, the race of men in the warmer climates
 might become as numerous as the trees of the forest. But in many
 parts of the earth, from the nature of the climate, and the soil,
 the spontaneous produce being next to nothing; the means of
 subsistence are the fruits only of labour and skill. If a people,
 while they retain their frugality, increase their industry, and
 improve their arts, their numbers must grow in proportion. Hence
 it is, that the cultivated fields of Europe are more peopled than
 the wilds of America, or the plains of Tartary.
     But even the increase of mankind which attends the
 accumulation of wealth, has its limits. The necessary of life is
 a vague and a relative term: it is one thing in the opinion of
 the savage; another in that of the polished citizen: it has a
 reference to the fancy, and to the habits of living. While arts
 improve, and riches increase; while the possessions of
 individuals, or their prospects of gain, come up to their opinion
 of what is required to settle a family, they enter on its cares
 with alacrity. But when the possession, however redundant, falls
 short of the standard, and a fortune supposed sufficient for
 marriage is attained with difficulty, population is checked, or
 begins to decline. The citizen, in his own apprehension, returns
 to the state of the savage; his children, he thinks, must perish
 for want; and he quits a scene overflowing with plenty, because
 he has not the fortune which his supposed rank, or his wishes,
 require. No ultimate remedy is applied to this evil, by merely
 accumulating wealth; for rare and costly materials, whatever
 these are, continue to be sought; and if silks and pearl are made
 common, men will begin to covet some new decorations, which the
 wealthy alone can procure. If they are indulged in their humour,
 their demands are repeated: For it is the continual increase of
 riches, not any measure attained, that keeps the craving
 imagination at ease.
     Men are tempted to labour, and to practise lucrative arts, by
 motives of interest. Secure to the workman the fruit of his
 labour, give him the prospects of independence or freedom, the
 public has found a faithful minister in the acquisition of
 wealth, and a faithful steward in hoarding what he has gained.
 The statesman in this, as in the case of population itself, can
 do little more than avoid doing mischief. It is well, if, in the
 beginning of commerce, he knows how to repress the frauds to
 which it is subject. Commerce, if continued, is the branch in
 which men committed to the effects of their own experience, are
 least apt to go wrong.
     The trader, in rude ages, is short-sighted, fraudulent, and
 mercenary; but in the progress and advanced state of his art, his
 views are enlarged, his maxims are established: he becomes
 punctual, liberal, faithful, and enterprising; and in the period
 of general corruption, he alone has every virtue, except the
 force to defend his acquisitions. He needs no aid from the state,
 but its protection; and is often in himself its most intelligent
 and respectable member. Even in China, we are informed, where
 pilfering, fraud, and corruption, are the reigning practice with
 all the other orders of men, the great merchant is ready to give,
 and to procure confidence: while his countrymen act on the plans
 and under the restrictions of a police adjusted to knaves, he
 acts on the reasons of trade, and the maims of mankind.
     If population be connected with national wealth, liberty and
 personal security is the great foundation of both: and if this
 foundation be laid in the state, nature has secured the increase
 and the industry of its members; the one by desires the most
 ardent in the human frame; the other by a consideration the most
 uniform and constant of any that possesses the mind. The great
 object of policy, therefore, with respect to both, is, to secure
 to the family its means of subsistence and settlement; to protect
 the industrious in the pursuit of his occupation; to reconcile
 the restrictions of police, and the social affections of mankind,
 with their separate and interested pursuits.
     In matters of particular profession, industry, and trade, the
 experienced practitioner is the master, and every general
 reasoner is a novice. The object in commerce is to make the
 individual rich; the more he gains for himself, the more he
 augments the wealth of his country. If a protection be required,
 it must be granted; if crimes and frauds be committed, they must
 be repressed; and government can pretend to no more. When the
 refined politician would lend an active hand, he only multiplies
 interruptions and grounds of complaint; when the merchant forgets
 his own interest to lay plans for his country, the period of
 vision and chimera is near, and the solid basis of commerce
 withdrawn. He might be told, perhaps, that while he pursues his
 advantage, and gives no cause of complaint, the interest of
 commerce is safe.
     The general police of France, proceeding on a supposition
 that the exportation of corn must drain the country where it has
 grown, had, till of late, laid that branch of commerce under a
 severe prohibition. The English landholder and the farmer had
 credit enough to obtain a premium for exportation, to favour the
 sale of their commodity; and the event has shewn, that private
 interest is a better patron of commerce and plenty, than the
 refinements of state. One nation lays the refined plan of a
 settlement on the continent of North America, and trusts little
 to the conduct of traders and short-sighted men; another leaves
 men to find their own position in a state of freedom, and to
 think for themselves. The active industry and the limited views
 of the one, made a thriving settlement; the great projects of the
 other were still in idea.
     But I willingly quit a subject in which I am not much
 conversant, and still less engaged by the views with which I
 write. Speculations on commerce and wealth have been delivered by
 the ablest writers, who have left nothing so important to be
 offered on the subject, as the general caution, not to consider
 these articles as making the sum of national felicity, or the
 principal object of any state.
     One nation, in search of gold and of precious metals, neglect
 the domestic sources of wealth, and become dependent on their
 neighbours for the necessaries of life: another so intent on
 improving their internal resources, and on increasing their
 commerce, that they become dependent on foreigners for the
 defence of what they acquire. It is even painful in conversation
 to find the interests of trade give the tone to our reasonings,
 and to find a subject perpetually offered as the great business
 of national councils, to which any interposition of government is
 seldom, with propriety, applied, or never beyond the protection
 it affords.
     We complain of a want of public spirit; but whatever may be
 the effect of this error in practice, in speculation it is none
 of our faults: we reason perpetually for the public; but the want
 of national views were frequently better than the possession of
 those we express: we would have nations, like a company of
 merchants, think of nothing but the increase of their stock;
 assemble to deliberate on profit and loss; and, like them too,
 intrust their protection to a force which they do not possess in
 themselves.
     Because men, like other animals, are maintained in
 multitudes, where the necessaries of life are amassed, and the
 store of wealth is enlarged, we drop our regards for the
 happiness, the moral and political character of a people; and
 anxious for the herd we would propagate, carry our views no
 farther than the stall and the pasture. We forget that the few
 have often made a prey of the many; that to the poor there is
 nothing so enticing as the coffers of the rich; and that when the
 price of freedom comes to be paid, the heavy sword of the victor
 may fall into the opposite scale.
     Whatever be the actual conduct of nations in this matter, it
 is certain, that many of our arguments would hurry us, for the
 sake of wealth and of population, into a scene where mankind
 being exposed to corruption, are unable to defend their
 possessions; and where they are, in the end, subject to
 oppression and ruin. We cut off the roots, while we would extend
 the branches, and thicken the foliage.
     It is possibly from an opinion that the virtues of men are
 secure, that some who turn from their attention to public
 affairs, think of nothing but the numbers and wealth of a people:
 it is from a dread of corruption, that others think of nothing
 but how to preserve the national virtues. Human society has great
 obligations to both. They are opposed to one another only by
 mistake; and even when united, have not strength sufficient to
 combat the wretched party, that refers every object to personal
 interest, and that cares not for the safety or increase of any
 stock but its own.
 
 Section V
 
 Of National Defence and Conquest
 
     It is impossible to ascertain how much of the policy of any
 state has a reference to war, or to national safety. 'Our
 legislator,' says the Cretan in Plato, 'thought that nations were
 by nature in a state of hostility. he took his measures
 accordingly; and observing that all the possessions of the
 vanquished pertain to the victor, he held it ridiculous to
 propose any benefit to his country, before he had provided that
 it should not be conquered.'
     Crete, which is supposed to have been a model of military
 policy, is commonly considered as the original from which the
 celebrated laws of Lycurgus were copied. Mankind, it seems, in
 every instance, must have some palpable object to direct their
 proceedings, and must have a view to some point of external
 utility, even in the choice of their virtues. The discipline of
 Sparta was military. and a sense of its use in the field, more
 than the force of unwritten and traditionary laws, or the
 supposed engagement of the public faith obtained by the lawgiver,
 may have induced this people to persevere in the observance of
 many rules, which to other nations do not appear necessary,
 except in the presence of an enemy.
     Every institution of this singular people gave a lesson of
 obedience, of fortitude, and of zeal for the public: but it is
 remarkable that they chose to obtain, by their virtues alone,
 what other nations are fain to buy with their treasure; and it is
 well known, that, in the course of their history, they came to
 regard their discipline merely on account of its moral effects.
 They had experienced the happiness of a mind courageous,
 disinterested, and devoted to its best affections; and they
 studied to preserve this character in themselves, by resigning
 the interests of ambition, and the hopes of military glory, even
 by sacrificing the numbers of their people.
     It was the fate of Spartans who escaped from the field, not
 of those who perished with Cleombrotus at Leuctra, that filled
 the cottages of Lacedemon with mourning and serious
 reflection:(14*) it was the fear of having their citizens
 corrupted abroad, by intercourse with servile and mercenary men,
 that made them quit the station of leaders in the Persian war,
 and leave Athens, during years, to pursue, unrivalled, that
 career of ambition and fifty profit, by which she made such
 acquisitions of power and of wealth.(15*)
     We have had occasion to observe, that in every rude state,
 the great business is war; and that in barbarous times, mankind,
 being generally divided into small parties, are engaged in almost
 perpetual hostilities. This circumstance gives the military
 leader a continued ascendant in his country, and inclines every
 people, during warlike ages, to monarchical government.
     The conduct of an army can least of all subjects be divided:
 and we may be justly surprised to find, that the Romans, after
 many ages of military experience, and after having recently felt
 the arms of Hannibal, in many encounters, associated two leaders
 at the head of the same army, and left them to adjust their
 pretensions, by taking the command, each a day in his turn. The
 same people, however, on other occasions, thought it expedient to
 suspend the exercise of every subordinate magistracy, and in the
 time of great alarms, to intrust all the authority of the state
 in the hands of one person.
     Republics have generally found it necessary, in the conduct
 of war, to place great confidence in the executive branch of
 their government. When a consul at Rome had proclaimed his
 levies, and administered the military oath, he became from that
 moment master of the public treasury, and of the lives of those
 who were under his command.(16*) The axe and the rods were no
 longer a mere badge of magistracy, or an empty pageant, in the
 hands of the lictor. they were, at the command of the father,
 stained with the blood of his own children; and fell, without
 appeal, on the mutinous and the disobedient of every condition.
     In every free state, there is a perpetual necessity to
 distinguish the maxims of martial law from those of the civil;
 and he who has not learned to give an implicit obedience, where
 the state has given him a military leader, and to resign his
 personal freedom in the field, from the same magnanimity with
 which he maintains it in the political deliberations of his
 country, has yet to learn the most important lesson of civil
 society, and is only fit to occupy a place in a rude, or in a
 corrupted state, where the principles of mutiny and of servility
 being joined, the one or the other is frequently adopted in the
 wrong place.
     From a regard to what is necessary in war, nations inclined
 to popular or aristocratical government, have had recourse to
 establishments that bordered on monarchy. Even where the highest
 office of the state was in common times administered by a
 plurality of persons, the whole power and authority belonging to
 it was, on particular occasions, committed to one; and upon great
 alarms, when the political fabric was shaken or endangered, a
 monarchical power has been applied, like a prop, to secure the
 state against the rage of the tempest. Thus were the dictators
 occasionally named at Rome, and the stadtholders in the United
 Provinces; and thus, in mixed governments, the royal prerogative
 is occasionally enlarged, by the temporary suspension of
 laws,(17*) and the barriers of liberty appear to be removed, in
 order to vest a dictatorial power in the hands of the king.
     Had mankind, therefore, no view but to warfare, it is
 probable that they would continue to prefer monarchical
 government to any other; or at least that every nation, in order
 to procure secret and united councils, would intrust the
 executive power with unlimited authority. But, happily for civil
 society, men have objects of a different sort: and experience has
 taught, that although the conduct of armies requires an absolute
 and undivided command; yet a national force is best formed, where
 numbers of men are inured to equality; and where the meanest
 citizen may consider himself, upon occasion, as destined to
 command as well as to obey. It is here that the dictator finds a
 spirit and a force prepared to second his councils; it is here
 too that the dictator himself is formed, and that numbers of
 leaders are presented to the public choice; it is here that the
 prosperity of a state is independent of single men, and that a
 wisdom which never dies, with a system of military arrangements
 permanent and regular, can, even under the greatest misfortunes,
 prolong the national struggle. With this advantage, the Romans,
 finding a number of distinguished leaders arise in succession,
 were at all times almost equally prepared to contend with their
 enemies of Asia or Africa; while the fortune of those enemies, on
 the contrary, depended on the casual appearance of singular men,
 of a Mithridates, or of a Hannibal.
     The soldier, we are told, has his point of honour, and a
 fashion of thinking, which he wears with his sword. This point of
 honour in free and uncorrupted states, is a zeal for the public;
 and war to them, is an operation of passions, not the mere
 pursuit of a calling. Its good and its ill effects are felt in
 extremes: the friend is made to experience the warmest proofs of
 attachment, the enemy the severest effects of animosity. On this
 system the celebrated nations of antiquity made war under their
 highest attainments of civility, and under their greatest degrees
 of refinement.
     In small and rude societies, the individual finds himself
 attacked in every national war; and none can propose to devolve
 his defence on another. 'The King of Spain is a great prince,'
 said an American chief to the governor of Jamaica, who was
 preparing a body of troops to join in an enterprise against the
 Spaniards: 'do you propose to make war upon so great a king with
 so small a force?' Being told that the forces he saw were to be
 joined by troops from Europe, and that the governor could then
 command no more: 'Who are these then,' said the American, 'who
 form this croud of spectators? are they not your people? and why
 do you not all go forth to so great a war?' He was answered, That
 the spectators were merchants, and other inhabitants, who took no
 part in the service: 'Would they be merchants still,' continued
 this statesman, 'if the King of Spain was to attack you here? For
 my part, I do not think that merchants should be permitted to
 live in any country: when I go to war, I leave no body at home
 but the women.' It should seem that this simple warrior
 considered merchaNts as a kind of neutral persons, who took no
 part in the quarrels of their country; and that he did not know
 how much war itself may be made a subject of traffic; what mighty
 armies may be put in motion from behind the counter; how often
 human blood is, without any national animosity, bought and sold
 for bills of exchange; and how often the prince, the nobles, and
 the statesmen, in many a polished nation, might, in his account,
 be considered as merchants.
     In the progress of arts and of policy, the members of every
 state are divided into classes; and in the commencement of this
 distribution, there is no distinction more serious than that of
 the warrior and the pacific inhabitant; no more is required to
 place men in the relation of master and slave. Even when the
 rigours of an established slavery abate, as they have done in
 modern Europe, in consequence of a protection, and a property,
 allowed to the mechanic and labourer, this distinction serves
 still to separate the noble from the base, and to point out that
 class of men who are destined to reign and to domineer in their
 country.
     It was certainly never foreseen by mankind, that in the
 pursuit of refinement, they were to reverse this order; or even
 that they were to place the government, and the military force of
 nations, in different hands. But is it equally unforseen, that
 the former order may again take place? and that the pacific
 citizen, however distinguished by privilege and rank, must one
 day bow to the person with whom he has intrusted his sword. If
 such revolutions should actually follow, will this new master
 revive in his own order the spirit of the noble and the free?
 Will he renew the characters of the warrior and the statesman?
 Will he restore to his country the civil and military virtues? I
 am afraid to reply. Montesquieu observes, that the government of
 Rome, even under the emperors, became, in the hands of the
 troops, elective and republican: but the Fabii or the Bruti were
 heard of no more, after the praetorian bands became the republic.
     We have enumerated some of the heads under which a people, as
 they emerge from barbarity, may come to be classed. Such are, the
 nobility, the people, the adherents of the prince; and even the
 priesthood have not been forgotten: when we arrive at times of
 refinement, the army must be joined to the list. The departments
 of civil government and of war being severed, and the
 pre-eminence being given to the statesman, the ambitious will
 naturally devolve the military service on those who are contented
 with a subordinate station. They who have the greatest share in
 the division of fortune, and the greatest interest in defending
 their country, having resigned the sword, must pay for what they
 have ceased to perform; and armies, not only at a distance from
 home, but in the very bosom of their country, are subsisted by
 pay. A discipline is invented to inure the soldier to perform,
 from habit, and from the fear of punishment, those hazardous
 duties, which the love of the public, or a national spirit, no
 longer inspire.
     When we consider the breach that such an establishment makes
 in the system of national virtues, it is unpleasant to observe,
 that most nations who have run the career of civil arts, have, in
 some degree, adopted this measure. Not only states, which either
 have wars to maintain, or precarious possessions to defend at a
 distance; not only a prince jealous of his authority, or in haste
 to gain the advantage of discipline, are disposed to employ
 foreign troops, or to keep standing armies; but even republics,
 with little of the former occasion, and none of the motives which
 prevail in monarchy, have been found to tread in the same path.
     If military arrangements occupy so considerable a place in
 the domestic policy of nations, the actual consequences of war
 are equally important in the history of mankind. Glory and spoil
 were the earliest subject of quarrels; a concession of
 superiority, or a ransom, were the prices of peace. The love of
 safety, and the desire of dominion, equally lead mankind to wish
 for accessions of strength. Whether as victors or as vanquished,
 they tend to a coalition; and powerful nations considering a
 province, or a fortress acquired on their frontier, as so much
 gained, are perpetually intent on extending their limits.
     The maxims of conquest are not always to be distinguished
 from those of self-defence. If a neighbouring state be dangerous,
 if it be frequently troublesome, it is a maxim founded in the
 consideration of safety, as well as of conquest, That it ought to
 be weakened or disarmed: If, being onCe reduced, it be disposed
 to renew the contest, it must from thenceforward be governed in
 form. Rome never avowed any other maxims of conquest; and she
 every where sent her insolent armies, under the specious pretence
 of procuring to herself and her allies a lasting peace, which she
 alone would reserve the power to disturb.
     The equality of those alliances which the Grecian states
 formed against each other, maintained, for a time, their
 independence and separation; and that time was the shining and
 the happy period of their story. It was prolonged more by
 vigilance and conduct which they severally applied, than by the
 moderation of their councils, or by any peculiarities of domestic
 policy which arrested their progress. The victors were sometimes
 contented, with merely changing to a resemblance, of their own
 forms the government of the states they subdued. What the next
 step might have been in the progress of impositions, is hard to
 determine. But when we consider, that one party fought for the
 imposition of tributes, another for the ascendant in war, it
 cannot be doubted, that the Athenians, from a national ambition,
 and from the desire of wealth, and the Spartans, though they
 originally only meant to defend themselves, and their allies,
 were both, at last, equally willing to become the masters of
 Greece; and were preparing for each other at home, that yoke,
 which both, together with their confederates, were obliged to
 receive from abroad.
     In the conquests of Philip, the desire of self-preservation
 and security seemed to be blended with the ambition natural to
 princes. He turned his arms successively to the quarters on which
 he found himself hurt, from which he had been alarmed or
 provoked: and when he had subdued the Greeks, he proposed to lead
 them against their ancient enemy of Persia. In this he laid the
 plan which Was carried into execution by his son.
     The Romans, become the masters of Italy, and the conquerors
 of Carthage, had been alarmed on the side of Macedon, and were
 led to cross a new sea in search of a new field, on which to
 exercise their military force. In prosecution of their wars, from
 the earliest to the latest date of their history, without
 intending the very conquests they made, perhaps without
 foreseeing what advantage they were to reap from the subjection
 of distant provinces, or in what manner they were to govern their
 new acquisitions, they still proceeded to seize what came
 successively within their reach; and, stimulated by a policy
 which engaged them in perpetual wars, which led to perpetual
 victory and accessions of territory, they extended the frontier
 of a state, which, but a few centuries before, had been confined
 within the skirts of a village, to the Euphrates, the Danube, the
 Weser, the Forth, and the Ocean.
     It is vain to affirm, that the genius of any nation is
 adverse to conquest. Its real interests indeed most commonly are
 so; but every state which is prepared to defend itself, and to
 obtain victories, is likewise in hazard of being tempted to
 conquer.
     In Europe, where mercenary and disciplined armies are every
 where formed, and ready to traverse the earth, where, like a
 flood pent up by slender banks, they are only restrained by
 political forms, or a temporary balance of power; if the sluices
 should break, what inundations may we not expect to behold?
 Effeminate kingdoms and empires are spread from the sea of Corea
 to the Atlantic ocean. Every state, by the defeat of its troops,
 may be turned into a province; every army opposed in the field
 to-day may be hired to-morrow; and every victory gained, may give
 the accession of a new military force to the victor.
     The Romans, with inferior arts of communication both by sea
 and land, maintained their dominion in a considerable part of
 Europe, Asia, and Africa, over fierce and intractable nations:
 What may not the fleets and armies of Europe, with the access
 they have by commerce to every part of the world, and the
 facility of their conveyance, effect, if that ruinous maxim
 should prevail, That the grandeur of a nation is to be estimated
 from the extent of its territory; or, That the interest of any
 particular people consists in reducing their neighbours to
 servitude?
 
 Section VI
 
 Of Civil Liberty
 
     If war, either for depredation or defence, were the principal
 object of nations, every tribe would, from its earliest state,
 aim at the condition of a Tartar horde; and in all its successes
 would hasten to the grandeur of a Tartar empire. The military
 leader would supersede the civil magistrate; and preparations to
 fly with all their possessions, or to pursue with all their
 forces, would, in every society, make the sum of their public
 arrangements.
     He who first on the banks of the Wolga, or the Jenisca, had
 taught the Scythian to mount the horse, to move his cottage on
 wheels, to harass his enemy alike by his attacks and his flights,
 to handle at full speed the lance and the bow, and when beat from
 the field, to leave his arrows in the wind to meet his pursuer;
 he who had taught his countrymen to use the same animal for every
 purpose of the dairy, the shambles, and the field; would be
 esteemed the founder of his nation; or, like Ceres and Bacchus
 among the Greeks, would be invested with the honours of a god, as
 the reward of his useful inventions. Amidst such institutions,
 the names and atchievements of Hercules and Jason might have been
 transmitted to posterity; but those of Lycurgus or Solon, the
 heroes of political society, could have gained no reputation,
 either fabulous or real, in the records of fame.
     Every tribe of warlike barbarians may entertain among
 themselves the strongest sentiments of affection and honour,
 while they carry to the rest of mankind the aspect of banditti
 and robbers.(18*) They may be indifferent to interest, and
 superior to danger; but our sense of humanity, our regard to the
 rights of nations, our admiration of civil wisdom and justice,
 even our effeminacy itself, make us turn away with contempt, or
 with horror, from a scene which exhibits so few of our good
 qualities, and which serve so much to reproach our weakness.
     It is in conducting the affairs of civil society, that
 mankind find the exercise of their best talents, as well as the
 object of their best affections. It is in being grafted on the
 advantages of civil society, that the art of war is brought to
 perfection; that the resources of armies, and the complicated
 springs to be touched in their conduct, are best understood. The
 most celebrated warriors were also citizens: opposed to a Roman,
 or a Greek, the chieftain of Thrace, of Germany, or Gaul, was a
 novice. The native of Pella learned the principles of his art
 from Epaminondas and Pelopidas.
     If nations, as hath been observed in the preceding section,
 must adjust their policy on the prospect of war from abroad, they
 are equally bound to provide for the attainment of peace at home.
 But there is no peace in the absence of justice. It may subsist
 with divisions, disputes, and contrary opinions; but not with the
 commission of wrongs. The injurious, and the injured, are, as
 implied in the very meaning of the terms, in a state of
 hostility.
     Where men enjoy peace, they owe it either to their mutual
 regards and affections, or to the restraints of law. Those are
 the happiest states which procure peace to their members by the
 first of these methods: but it is sufficiently uncommon to
 procure it even by the second. The first would with-hold the
 occasions of war and of competition: the second adjusts the
 pretensions of men by stipulations and treaties. Sparta taught
 her citizens not to regard interest: other free nations secure
 the interest of their members, and consider this as a principal
 part of their rights.
     Law is the treaty to which members of the same community have
 agreed, and under which the magistrate and the subject continue
 to enjoy their rights, and to maintain the peace of society. The
 desire of lucre is the great motive to injuries: law therefore
 has a principal reference to property. It would ascertain the
 different methods by which property may be acquired, as by
 prescription, conveyance, and succession; and it makes the
 necessary provisions for rendering the possession of property
 secure.
     Beside avarice, there are other motives from which men are
 unjust; such are pride, malice, envy, and revenge. The law would
 eradicate the principles themselves, or at least prevent their
 effects.
     From whatever motive wrongs are committed, there are
 different particulars in which the injured may suffer. He may
 suffer in his goods, in his person, or in the freedom of his
 conduct. Nature has made him master of every action which is not
 injurious to others. The laws of his particular society intitle
 him perhaps to a determinate station, and bestow on him a certain
 share in the government of his country. An injury, therefore,
 which in this respect puts him under any unjust restraint, may be
 called an infringement of his political rights.
     Where the citizen is supposed to have rights of property and
 of station, and is protected in the exercise of them, he is said
 to be free; and the very restraints by which he is hindered from
 the commission of crimes, are a part of his liberty. No person is
 free, where any person is suffered to do wrong with impunity.
 Even the despotic prince on his throne, is not an exception to
 this general rule. He himself is a slave, the moment he pretends
 that force should decide any contest. The disregard he throws on
 the rights of his people recoils on himself; and in the general
 uncertainty of all conditions, there is no tenure more precarious
 than his own.
     From the different particulars to which men refer, in
 speaking of liberty, whether to the safety of the person and the
 goods, the dignity of rank, or the participation of political
 importance, as well as from the different methods by which their
 rights are secured, they are led to differ in the interpretation
 of the term; and every people is apt to imagine, that its
 signification is to be found only among themselves.
     Some having thought, that the unequal distribution of wealth
 is unjust, required a new division of property, as the foundation
 of freedom. This scheme is suited to democratical government; and
 in such only it has been admitted with any degree of effect.
     New settlements, like that of the people of Israel, and
 singular establishments, like those of Sparta and Crete, have
 furnished examples of its actual execution; but in most other
 states, even the democratical spirit could attain no more than to
 prolong the struggle for Agrarian laws; to procure, on occasion,
 the expunging of debts; and to keep the people in mind, under all
 the distinctions of fortune, that they still had a claim to
 equality.
     The citizen at Rome, at Athens, and in many republics,
 contended for himself, and his order. The Agrarian law was moved
 and debated for ages: it served to awaken the mind; it nourished
 the spirit of equality, and furnished a field on which to exert
 its force; but was never established with any of its other and
 more formal effects.
     Many of the establishments which serve to defend the weak
 from oppression, contribute, by securing the possession of
 property, to favour its unequal division, and to increase the
 ascendant of those from whom the abuses of power maybe
 feared.Those abuses were felt very early both at Athens and
 Rome.(19*)
     It has been proposed to prevent the excessive accumulation of
 wealth in particular hands, by limiting the increase of private
 fortunes, by prohibiting entails, and by with-holding the right
 of primogeniture in the succession of heirs. It has been proposed
 to prevent the ruin of moderate estates, and to restrain the use,
 and consequently the desire, of great ones, by sumptuary laws.
 These different methods are more or less consistent with the
 interests of commerce, and may be adopted, in different degrees,
 by a people whose national object is wealth: and they have their
 degree of effect, by inspiring moderation, or a sense of
 equality, and by stifling the passions by which mankind are
 prompted to mutual wrongs.
     It appears to be, in a particular manner, the object of
 sumptuary laws, and of the equal division of wealth, to prevent
 the gratification of vanity, to check the ostentation of superior
 fortune, and, by this means, to weaken the desire of riches, and
 to preserve in the breast of the citizen, that moderation and
 equity which ought to regulate his conduct.
     This end is never perfectly attained in any state where the
 unequal division of property is admitted, and where fortune is
 allowed to bestow distinction and rank. It is indeed difficult,
 by any methods whatever, to shut up this source of corruption. Of
 all the nations whose history is known with certainty, the design
 itself, and the manner of executing it, appear to have been
 understood in Sparta alone.
     There property was indeed acknowledged by law; but in
 consequence of certain regulations and practices, the most
 effectual, it seems, that mankind have hitherto found out, the
 manners that prevail among simple nations before the
 establishment of property, were in some measure preserved;(20*)
 the passion for riches was, during many ages, suppressed; and the
 citizen was made to consider himself as the property of his
 country, not as the owner of a private estate.
     It was held ignominious either to buy or to sell the
 patrimony of a citizen. Slaves were, in every family, intrusted
 with the care of its effects, and freemen were strangers to
 lucrative arts; justice was established on a contempt of the
 ordinary allurement to crimes; and the preservatives of civil
 liberty applied by the state, were the dispositions that were
 made to prevail in the hearts of its members.
     The individual was relieved from every solicitude that could
 arise on the head of his fortune; he was educated, and he was
 employed for life in the service of the public; he was fed at a
 place of common resort, to which he could carry no distinction
 but that of his talents and his virtues; his children were th
 wards and the pupils of the state; he himself was taught to be a
 parent, and a director to the youth of his country, not the
 anxious father of a separate family.
     This people, we are told, bestowed some care in adorning
 their persons, and were known from afar by the red or the purple
 they wore; but could not make their equipage, their buildings, or
 their furniture, a subject of fancy, or of what we call taste.
 The carpenter and the house-builder were restricted to the use of
 the axe and the saw: their workmanship must have been simple, and
 probably, in respect to its form, continued for ages the same.
 The ingenuity of the artist was employed in cultivating his own
 nature, not in adorning the habitations of his fellow-citizens.
     On this plan, they had senators, magistrates, leaders of
 armies, and ministers of state; but no men of fortune. Like the
 heroes of Homer, they distributed honours by the measure of the
 cup and the platter. A citizen, who, in his political capacity,
 was the arbiter of Greece, thought himself honoured by receiving
 a double portion of plain entertainment at supper. He was active,
 penetrating, brave, disinterested, and generous; but his estate,
 his table, and his furniture, might, in our esteem, have marred
 the lustre of all his virtues. Neighbouring nations, however,
 applied for commanders to this nursery of statesmen and warriors,
 as we apply for the practitioners of every art to the countries
 in which they excel; for cooks to France, and for musicians to
 Italy.
     After all, we are, perhaps, not sufficiently instructed in
 the nature of the Spartan laws and institutions, to understand in
 what manner all the ends of this singular state were obtained;
 but the admiration paid to its people, and the constant reference
 of contemporary historians to their avowed superiority, will not
 allow us to question the facts. 'When I observed,' says Xenophon,
 'that this nation, though not the most populous, was the most
 powerful state of Greece, I was seized with wonder, and with an
 earnest desire to know by what arts it attained its pre-eminence;
 but when I came to the knowledge of its institutions, my wonder
 ceased. -- As one man excels another, and as he who is at pains
 to cultivate his mind, must surpass the person who neglects it;
 so the Spartans should excel every nation, being the only state
 in which virtue is studied as the object of government.'
     The subjects of property, considered with a view to
 subsistence, or even to enjoyment, have little effect in
 corrupting mankind, or in awakening the spirit of competition and
 of jealousy; but considered with a view to distinction and
 honour, where fortune constitutes rank, they excite the most
 vehement passions, and absorb all the sentiments of the human
 soul: they reconcile avarice and meanness with ambition and
 vanity; and lead men through the practice of sordid and mercenary
 arts to the possession of a supposed elevation and dignity.
     Where this source of corruption, on the contrary, is
 effectually stopped, the citizen is dutiful, and the magistrate
 upright; any form of government may be wisely administered;
 places of trust are likely to be well supplied; and by whatever
 rule office and power are bestowed, it is likely that all the
 capacity and force that subsists in the state will come to be
 employed in its service: for on this supposition, experience and
 abilities are the only guides and the only titles to public
 confidence; and if citizens be ranged into separate classes, they
 become mutual checks by the difference of their opinions, not by
 the opposition of their interested designs.
     We may easily account for the censures bestowed on the
 government of Sparta, by those who considered it merely on the
 side of its forms. It was not calculated to prevent the practice
 of crimes, by balancing against each other the selfish and
 partial dispositions of men; but to inspire the virtues of the
 soul, to procure innocence by the absence of criminal
 inclinations, and to derive its internal peace from the
 indifference of its members to the ordinary motives of strife and
 disorder. It were trifling to seek for its analogy to any other
 constitution of state, in which its principal characteristic and
 distinguishing feature is not to be found. The collegiate
 sovereignty, the senate, and the ephori, had their counterparts
 in other republics, and a resemblance has been found in
 particular to the government of Carthage:(21*) but what affinity
 of consequence can be found between a state whose sole object was
 virtue, and another whose principal object was wealth; between a
 people whose associated kings, being lodged in the same cottage,
 had no fortune but their daily food; and a commercial republic,
 in which a proper estate was required as a necessary
 qualification for the higher offices of state?
     Other petty commonwealths expelled kings, when they became
 jealous of their designs, or after having experienced their
 tyranny; here the hereditary succession of kings was preserved:
 other states were afraid of the intrigues and cabals of their
 members in competition for dignities; here solicitation was
 required as the only condition upon which a place in the senate
 was obtained. A supreme inquisitorial power was, in the persons
 of the ephori, safely committed to a few men, who were drawn by
 lot, and without distinction, from every order of the people: and
 if a contrast to this, as well as to many other articles of the
 Spartan policy, be required, it may be found in the general
 history of mankind.
     But Sparta, under every supposed error of its form, prospered
 for ages, by the integrity of its manners, and by the character
 of its citizens. When that integrity was broken, this people did
 not languish in the weakness of nations sunk in effeminacy. They
 fell into the stream by which other states had been carried in
 the torrent of violent passions, and in the outrage of barbarous
 times. They ran the career of other nations, after that of
 ancient Sparta was finished: they built walls, and began to
 improve their possessions, after they ceased to improve their
 people; and on this new plan, in their struggle for political
 life, they survived the system of states that perished under the
 Macedonian dominion: they lived to act with another which arose
 in the Achaean league; and were the last community of Greece that
 became a village in the empire of Rome.
     If it should be thought we have dwelt too long on the history
 of this singular people, it may be remembered, in excuse, that
 they alone, in the language of Xenophon, made virtue an object of
 state.
     We must be contented to derive our freedom from a different
 source; to expect justice from the limits which are set to the
 powers of the magistrate, and to rely for protection on the laws
 which are made to secure the estate, and the person of the
 subject. We live in societies, where men must be rich, in order
 to be great; where pleasure itself is often pursued from vanity;
 where the desire of a supposed happiness serves to inflame the
 worst of passions, and is itself the foundation of misery; where
 public justice, like fetters applied to the body, may, without
 inspiring the sentiments of candour and equity, prevent the
 actual commission of crimes.
     Mankind come under this description the moment they are
 seized with their passions for riches and power. But their
 description in every instance is mixed: in the best there is an
 alloy of evil; in the worst a mixture of good. Without any
 establishments to preserve their manners, besides penal laws, and
 the restraints of police, they derive, from instinctive feelings,
 a love of integrity and candour, and, from the very contagion of
 society itself, an esteem for what is honourable and
 praise-worthy. They derive, from their union, and joint
 opposition to foreign enemies, a zeal for their own community,
 and courage to maintain its rights. If the frequent neglect of
 virtue as a political object, tend to discredit the
 understandings of men, its lustre, and its frequency, as a
 spontaneous offspring of the heart, will restore the honours of
 our nature.    In every casual and mixed state of the national
 manners, the safety of every individual, and his political
 consequence, depends much on himself, but more on the party to
 which he is joined. For this reason, all who feel a common
 interest, are apt to unite in parties; and, as far as that
 interest requires, mutually support each other.
     Where the citizens of any free community are of different
 orders, each order has a peculiar set of claims and pretensions:
 relatively to the other members of the state, it is a party;
 relatively to the differences of interest among its own members,
 it may admit of numberless subdivisions. But in every state there
 are two interests very readily apprehended; that of a prince and
 his adherents, that of a nobility, or of any temporary faction,
 opposed to the people.
     Where the sovereign power is reserved by the collective body,
 it appears unnecessary to think of additional establishments for
 securing the rights of the citizen, But it is difficult, if not
 impossible, for the collective body to exercise this power in a
 manner that supersedes the necessity of every other political
 caution.
     If popular assemblies assume every function of government;
 and if, in the same tumultuous manner in which they can, with
 great propriety, express their feelings, the sense of their
 rights, and their animosity to foreign or domestic enemies, they
 pretend to deliberate on points of national conduct, or to decide
 questions of equity and justice; the public is exposed to
 manifold inconveniencies; and popular governments would, of all
 others, be the most subject to errors in administration, and to
 weakness in the execution of public measures.
     To avoid these disadvantages, the people are always contented
 to delegate part of their powers. They establish a senate to
 debate, and to prepare, if not to determine, questions that are
 brought to the collective body for a final resolution. They
 commit the executive power to some council of this sort, or to a
 magistrate who presides in their meetings. Under the use of this
 necessary and common expedient, even while democratical forms are
 most carefully guarded, there is one party of the few, another of
 the many. One attacks, the other defends; and they are both ready
 to assume in their turns. But though, in reality, a great danger
 to liberty arises on the part of the people themselves, who, in
 times of corruption, are easily made the instruments of
 usurpation and tyranny; yet, in the ordinary aspect of
 government, the executive carries an air of superiority, and the
 rights of the people seem always exposed to incroachment.
     Though on the day that the Roman people assembled in their
 tribes, the senators mixed with the croud, and the consul was no
 more than the servant of the multitude; yet, when this awful
 meeting was dissolved, the senators met to prescribe business for
 their sovereign, and the consul went armed with the axe and the
 rods, to teach every Roman, in his separate capacity, the
 submission which he owed to the state.
     Thus, even where the collective body is sovereign, they are
 assembled only occasionally: and though on such occasions they
 determine every question relative to their rights and their
 interests as a people, and can assert their freedom with
 irresistible force; yet they do not think themselves, nor are
 they in reality, safe, without a more constant and more uniform
 power operating in their favour.
     The multitude is every where strong; but requires, for the
 safety of its members, when separate as well as when assembled, a
 head to direct and to employ its strength. For this purpose, the
 ephori, we are told, were established at Sparta, the council of a
 hundred at Carthage, and the tribunes at Rome. So prepared, the
 popular party has, in many instances, been able to cope with its
 adversaries, and has even trampled on the powers, whether
 aristocratical or monarchical, with which it would have been
 otherwise unequally matched. The state, in such cases, commonly
 suffered by the delays, interruptions, and confusions, which
 popular leaders, from private envy, or a prevailing jealousy of
 the great, seldom failed to create in the proceedings of
 government.
     Where the people, as in some larger communities, have only a
 share in the legislature, they cannot overwhelm the collateral
 powers, who having likewise a share, are in condition to defend
 themselves: where they act only by their representatives, their
 force may be uniformly employed. And they may make part in a
 constitution of government more lasting than any of those in
 which the people possessing or pretending to the entire
 legislature, are, when assembled, the tyrants, and, when
 dispersed, the slaves, of a distempered state. In governments
 properly mixed, the popular interest, finding a counterpoise in
 that of the prince or of the nobles, a balance is actually
 established between them, in which the public freedom and the
 public order are made to consist.
     From some such casual arrangement of different interests, all
 the varieties of mixed government proceed; and on the degree of
 consideration which every separate interest can procure to
 itself, depends the equity of the laws they enact, and the
 necessity they are able to impose, of adhering strictly to the
 terms of law in its execution. States are accordingly unequally
 qualified to conduct the business of legislation, and unequally
 fortunate in the completeness, and regular observance, of their
 civil code.
     In democratical establishments, citizens, feeling themselves
 possessed of the sovereignty, are not equally anxious, with the
 subject of other governments, to have their rights explained, or
 secured, by actual statute. They trust to personal vigour, to the
 support of party, and to the sense of the public.
     If the collective body perform the office of judge, as well
 as of legislator, they seldom think of devising rules for their
 own direction, and are found more seldom to follow any
 determinate rule, after it is made. They dispense, at one time,
 with what they enacted at another; and in their judicative,
 perhaps even more than in their legislative, capacity, are guided
 by passions and partialities that arise from circumstances of the
 case before them.
     But under the simplest governments of a different sort,
 whether aristocracy or monarchy, there is a necessity for law,
 and there are a variety of interests to be adjusted in framing
 every statute. The sovereign wishes to give stability and order
 to administration, by express and promulgated rules. The subject
 wishes to know the conditions and limits of his duty. He
 acquiesces, or he revolts, according as the terms on which he is
 made to live with the sovereign, or with his fellow-subjects,
 are, or are not, consistent with the sense of his rights.
     Neither the monarch, nor the council of nobles, where either
 is possessed of the sovereignty, can pretend to govern, or to
 judge at discretion. No magistrate, whether temporary or
 hereditary, can with safety neglect that reputation for justice
 and equity, from which his authority, and the respect that is
 paid to his person, are in a great measure derived. Nations,
 however, have been fortunate in the tenor, and in the execution
 of their laws, in proportion as they have admitted every order of
 the people, by representation or otherwise, to an actual share of
 the legislature. Under establishments of this sort, law is
 literally a treaty, to which the patties concerned have agreed,
 and have given their opinion in settling its terms. The interests
 to be affected by a law, are likewise consulted in making it.
 Every class propounds an objection, suggests an addition or an
 amendment of its own. They proceed to adjust, by stature, every
 subject of controversy: and while they continue to enjoy their
 freedom, they continue to multiply laws, and to accumulate
 volumes, as if they could remove every possible ground of
 dispute, and were secure of their rights, merely by having put
 them in writing.
     Rome and England, under their mixed governments, the one
 inclining to democracy, the other to monarchy, have proved the
 great legislators among nations. The first has left the
 foundation, and great part of the superstructure of its civil
 code, to the continent of Europe: the other, in its island, has
 carried the authority and government of law to a point of
 perfection, which they never before attained in the history of
 mankind.
     Under such favourable establishments, known customs, the
 practice and decisions of courts, as well as positive statutes,
 acquire the authority of laws; and every proceeding is conducted
 by some fixed and determinate rule. The best and most effectual
 precautions are taken for the impartial application of rules to
 particular cases; and it is remarkable, that, in the two examples
 we have mentioned, a surprising coincidence is found in the
 singular methods of their jurisdiction. The people in both
 reserved in a manner the office of judgement to themselves, and
 brought the decision of civil rights, or of criminal questions,
 to the tribunal of peers, who, in judging of their
 fellow-citizens, prescribed a condition of life for themselves.
     It is not in mere laws, after all, that we are to look for
 the securities to justice, but in the powers by which those laws
 have been obtained, and without whose constant support they must
 fall to disuse. Statutes serve to record the rights of a people,
 and speak the intention of parties to defend what the letter of
 the law has expressed: but without the vigour to maintain what is
 acknowledged as a right, the mere record, or the feeble
 intention, is of little avail.
     A populace roused by oppression, or an order of men possessed
 of a temporary advantage, have obtained many charters,
 concessions, and stipulations, in favour of their claims; but
 where no adequate preparation was made to preserve them, the
 written articles were often forgotten, together with the occasion
 on which they were framed.
     The history of England, and of every free country, abounds
 with the example of statutes enacted when the people or their
 representatives assembled, but never executed when the crown or
 the executive was left to itself. The most equitable laws on
 paper are consistent with the utmost despotism in administration,
 Even the form of trial by juries in England had its authority in
 law, while the proceedings of courts were arbitrary and
 oppressive.
     We must admire, as the key-stone of civil liberty, the
 statute which forces the secrets of every prison to be revealed,
 the cause of every commitment to be declared, and the person of
 the accused to be produced, that he may claim his enlargement, or
 his trial, within a limited time. No wiser form was ever opposed
 to the abuses of power. But it requires a fabric no less than the
 whole political constitution of Great Britain, a spirit no less
 than the refractory and turbulent zeal of this fortunate people,
 to secure its effects.
     If even the safety of the person, and the tenure of property,
 which may be so well defined in the words of a statute, depend,
 for their preservation, on the vigour and jealousy of a free
 people, and on the degree of consideration which every order of
 the state maintains for itself; it is still more evident, that
 what we have called the political freedom, or the right of the
 individual to act in his station for himself and the public,
 cannot be made to rest on any other foundation. The estate may be
 saved, and the person released, by the forms of a civil
 procedure; but the rights of the mind cannot be sustained by any
 other force but its own.
 
 Section VII.
 
 Of the History of Arts
 
 
     We have already observed, that art is natural to man; and
 that the skill he acquires after many ages of practice, is only
 the improvement of a talent he possessed at the first. Vitruvius
 finds the rudiments of architecture in the form of a Scythian
 cottage. The armourer may find the first productions of his
 calling in the sling and the bow; and the ship-wright of his in
 the canoe of the savage. Even the historian and the poet may find
 the original essays of their arts in the tale, and the song,
 which celebrate the wars, the loves, and the adventures of men in
 their rudest condition.
     Destined to cultivate his own nature, or to mend his
 situation, man finds a continued subject of attention, ingenuity,
 and labour. Even where he does not propose any personal
 improvement, his faculties are strengthened by those very
 exercises in which he seems to forget himself: his reason and his
 affections are thus profitably engaged in the affairs of society;
 his invention and his skill are exercised in procuring his
 accommodations and his food; his particular pursuits are
 prescribed to him by circumstances of the age and of the country
 in which he lives: in one situation he is occupied with wars and
 political deliberations; in another, with the care of his
 interest, of his personal ease, or conveniency, He suits his
 means to the ends he has in view; and, by multiplying
 contrivances, proceeds, by degrees, to the perfection of his
 arts. In every step of his progress, if his skill be increased,
 his desire must likewise have time to extend: and it would be as
 vain to suggest a contrivance of which he slighted the use, as it
 would be to tell him of blessings which he could not command.
     Ages are generally supposed to have borrowed from those who
 went before them, and nations to have derived their portion of
 learning or of art from abroad. The Romans are thought to have
 learned from the Greeks, and the moderns of Europe from both. In
 this imagination we frequently proceed so far as to admit of
 nothing original in the practice or manners of any people. The
 Greek was a copy of the Egyptian, and even the Egyptian was an
 imitator, though we have lost sight of the model on which he was
 formed.
     It is known, that men improve by example and intercourse; but
 in the case of nations, whose members excite and direct each
 other, why seek from abroad the origin of arts, of which every
 society, having the principles in itself, only requires a
 favourable occasion to bring them to light? When such occasion
 presents itself to any people, they generally seize it; and while
 it continues, they improve the inventions to which it gave rise
 among themselves, or they willingly copy from others: but they
 never employ their own invention, nor look abroad, for
 instruction on subjects that do not lie in the way of their
 common pursuits; they never adopt a refinement of which they have
 not discovered the use.
     Inventions, we frequently observe, are accidental; but it is
 probable, that an accident which escapes the artist in one age,
 may be seized by one who succeeds him, and who is better apprised
 of its use. Where circumstances are favourable, and where a
 people is intent on the objects of any art, every invention is
 preserved, by being brought into general practice; every model is
 studied, and every accident is turned to account. If nations
 actually borrow from their neighbours, they probably borrow only
 what they are nearly in a condition to have invented themselves.
     Any singular practice of one country, therefore, is seldom
 transferred to another, till the way be prepared by the
 introduction of similar circumstances. Hence our frequent
 complaints of the dullness or obstinacy of mankind, and of the
 dilatory communication of arts, from one place to another. While
 the Romans adopted the arts of Greece, the Thracians and
 Illyrians continued to behold them with indifference. Those arts
 were, during one period, confined to the Greek colonies, and
 during another, to the Roman. Even where they were spread by a
 visible intercourse, they were still received by independent
 nations with the slowness of invention. They made a progress not
 more rapid at Rome than they had done at Athens; and they passed
 to the extremities of the Roman empire, only in company with new
 colonies, and joined to Italian policy.
     The modern race, who came abroad to the possession of
 cultivated provinces, retained the arts they had practised at
 home: the new master hunted the boar, or pastured his herds,
 where he might have raised a plentiful harvest: he built a
 cottage in the view of a palace: he buried, in one common ruin,
 the edifices, sculptures, paintings, and libraries, of the former
 inhabitant: he made a settlement upon a plan of his own, and
 opened anew the source of inventions, without perceiving from a
 distance to what length their progress might lead his posterity.
 The cottage of the present race, like that of the former, by
 degrees enlarged its dimensions; public buildings acquired a
 magnificence in a new taste. Even this taste came, in a course of
 ages, to be exploded, and the people of Europe recurred to the
 models which their fathers destroyed, and wept over the ruins
 which they could not restore.
     The literary remains of antiquity were studied and imitated,
 after the original genius of modern nations had broke forth: the
 rude efforts of poetry in Italy and Provence, resembled those of
 the Greeks and the ancient Romans. How far the merit of our works
 might, without the aid of their models, have risen by successive
 improvements, or whether we have gained more by imitation than we
 have lost by quitting our native system of thinking, and our vein
 of fable, must be left to conjecture. We are certainly indebted
 to them for the materials, as well as the form, of many of our
 compositions; and without their example, the strain of our
 literature, together with that of our manners and policy, would
 have been different from what they at present are. This much
 however may be said with assurance, that although the Roman and
 the modern literature savour alike of the Greek original, yet
 mankind in either instance would not have drank of this fountain,
 unless they had been hastening to open springs of their own.
     Sentiment and fancy, the use of the hand or the head, are not
 inventions of particular men; and the flourishing of arts that
 depend on them, are, in the case of any people, a proof rather of
 political felicity at home, than of any instruction received from
 abroad, or of any natural superiority in point of industry or
 talents, When the attentions of men are turned toward particular
 subjects, when the acquisitions of one age are left entire to the
 next, when every individual is protected in his place, and left
 to pursue the suggestion of his wants, devices accumulate; and it
 is difficult to find the original of any art. The steps which
 lead to perfection are many; and we are at a loss on whom to
 bestow the greatest share of our praise; on the first or on the
 last who may have bore a part in the progress.
 
 Section VIII
 
 Of the History of Literature
 
     If we may rely on the general observations contained in the
 last section, the literary, as well as mechanical arts, being a
 natural produce of the human mind, will rise spontaneously
 where-ever men are happily placed; and in certain nations it is
 not more necessary to look abroad for the origin of literature,
 than it is for the suggestion of any of the pleasures or
 exercises in which mankind, under a state of prosperity and
 freedom, are sufficiently inclined to indulge themselves.
     We are apt to consider arts as foreign and adventitious to
 the nature of man: but there is no art that did not find its
 occasion in human life, and that was not, in some one or other of
 the situations in which our species is found, suggested as a
 means for the attainment of some useful end. The mechanic and
 commercial arts took their rise from the love of property, and
 were encouraged by the prospects of safety and of gain: the
 literary and liberal arts took their rise from the understanding,
 the fancy, and the heart. They are mere exercises of the mind in
 search of its peculiar pleasures and occupations; and are
 promoted by circumstances that suffer the mind to enjoy itself.
     Men are equally engaged by the past, the present, and the
 future, and are prepared for every occupation that gives scope to
 their powers. Productions therefore, whether of narration,
 fiction, or reasoning, that tend to employ the imagination, or
 move the heart, continue for ages a subject of attention, and a
 source of delight. The memory of human transactions being
 preserved in tradition or writing, is the natural gratification
 of a passion that consists of curiosity, admiration, and the love
 of amusement.
     Before many books are written, and before science is greatly
 advanced, the productions of mere genius are sometimes complete:
 the performer requires not the aid of learning where his
 description or story relates to near and contiguous objects;
 where it relates to the conduct and characters of men with whom
 he himself has acted, and in whose occupations and fortunes he
 himself has borne a part.
     With this advantage, the poet is the first to offer the
 fruits of his genius, and to lead in the career of those arts by
 which the mind is destined to exhibit its imaginations, and to
 express its passions. Every tribe of barbarians have their
 passionate or historic rhymes, which contain the superstition,
 the enthusiasm, and the admiration of glory, with which the
 breasts of men, in the earliest state of society, are possessed.
 They delight in verse-compositions, either because the cadence of
 numbers is natural to the language of sentiment, or because, not
 having the advantage of writing, they are obliged to bring the
 ear in aid of the memory, in order to facilitate the repetition,
 and insure the preservation of their works.
     When we attend to the language which savages employ on any
 solemn occasion, it appears that man is a poet by nature. Whether
 at first obliged by the mere defects of his tongue, and the
 scantiness of proper expressions, or seduced by a pleasure of the
 fancy in stating the analogy of its objects, he clothes every
 conception in image and metaphor. 'We have planted the tree of
 peace,' says an American orator; 'we have buried the axe under
 its roots: we will henceforth repose under its shade; we will
 join to brighten the chain that binds our nations together.' Such
 are the collections of metaphor which those nations employ in
 their public harangues. They have likewise already adopted those
 lively figures, and that daring freedom of language, which the
 learned have afterwards found so well fitted to express the rapid
 transitions of the imagination, and the ardours of a passionate
 mind.
     If we are required to explain, how men could be poets, or
 orators, before they were aided by the learning of the scholar
 and the critic? we may inquire, in our turn, how bodies could
 fall by their weight, before the laws of gravitation were
 recorded in books? Mind, as well as body, has laws, which are
 exemplified in the practice of men, and which the critic collects
 only after the example has shewn what they are.
     Occasioned, probably, by the physical connection we have
 mentioned, between the emotions of a heated imagination, and the
 impressions received from music and pathetic sounds, every tale
 among rude nations is repeated in verse, and is made to take the
 form of a song The early history of all nations is uniform in
 this particular. Priests, statesmen, and philosophers, in the
 first ages of Greece, delivered their instructions in poetry, and
 mixed with the dealers in music and heroic fable.
     It is not so surprising, however, that poetry should be the
 first species of composition in every nation, as it is, that a
 style apparently so difficult, and so far removed from ordinary
 use, should be almost as universally the first to attain its
 maturity. The most admired of all poets lived beyond the reach of
 history, almost of tradition. The artless song of the savage, the
 heroic legend of the bard, have sometimes a magnificent beauty,
 which no change of language can improve, and no refinements of
 the critic reform.
     Under the supposed disadvantage of a limited knowledge, and a
 rude apprehension, the simple poet has impressions that more than
 compensate the defects of his skill. The best subjects of poetry,
 the characters of the violent and the brave, the generous and the
 intrepid, great dangers, trials of fortitude and fidelity, are
 exhibited within his view, or are delivered in traditions which
 animate like truth, because they are equally believed. He is not
 engaged in recalling, like Virgil or Tasso, the sentiments or
 scenery of an age remote from his own: he needs not be told by
 the critic,(22*) to recollect what another would have thought, or
 in what manner another would have expressed his conception. The
 simple passions, friendship, resentment, and love, are the
 movements of his own mind, and he has no occasion to copy. Simple
 and vehement in his conceptions and feelings, he knows no
 diversity of thought, or of style, to mislead or to exercise his
 judgement. He delivers the emotions of the heart, in words
 suggested by the heart: for he knows no other. And hence it is,
 that while we admire the judgement and invention of Virgil, and
 of other later poets, these terms appear misapplied to Homer.
 Though intelligent, as well as sublime, in his conceptions, we
 cannot anticipate the lights of his understanding, nor the
 movements of his heart: he appears to speak from inspiration, not
 from invention; and to be guided in the choice of his thoughts
 and expressions by a supernatural instinct, not by reflection.
     The language of early ages, is in one respect, simple and
 confined; in another, it is varied and free: it allows liberties,
 which, to the poet of after times, are denied.
     In rude ages men are not separated by distinctions of rank or
 profession. They live in one manner, and speak one dialect. The
 bard is not to chuse his expression among the singular accents of
 different conditions. He has not to guard his language from the
 peculiar errors of the mechanic, the peasant, the scholar, or the
 courtier, in order to find that elegant propriety, and just
 elevation, which is free from the vulgar of one class, the
 pedantic of the second, or the flippant of the third. The name of
 every object, and of every sentiment, is fixed; and if his
 conception has the dignity of nature, his expression will have a
 purity which does not depend on his choice.
     With this apparent confinement in the choice of his words, he
 is at liberty to break through the ordinary modes of
 construction; and in the form of a language not established by
 rules, may find for himself a cadence agreeable to the tone of
 his mind. The liberty he takes, while his meaning is striking,
 and his language is raised, appears an improvement, not a
 trespass on grammar. He delivers a style to the ages that follow,
 and becomes a model from which his posterity judge.
     But whatever may be the early disposition of mankind to
 poetry, or the advantage they possess in cultivating this species
 of literature; whether the early maturity of poetical
 compositions arise from their being the first studied, or from
 their having a charm to engage persons of the liveliest genius,
 who are best qualified to improve the eloquence of their native
 tongue; it is a remarkable fact, that, not only in countries
 where every vein of composition was original, and was opened in
 the order of natural succession; but even at Rome, and in modern
 Europe, where the learned began early to practise on foreign
 models, we have poets of every nation, who are perused with
 pleasure, while the prose writers of the same ages are neglected.
     As Sophocles and Euripides preceded the historians and
 moralists of Greece, not only Naevius and Ennius, who wrote the
 Roman history in verse, but Lucilius, Plautus, Terence, and we
 may add Lucretius, were prior to Cicero, Sallust, or Caesar.
 Dante and Petrarch went before any good prose writer in Italy;
 Corneille and Racine brought on the fine age of prose
 compositions in France; and we had in England, not only Chaucer
 and Spenser, but Shakespear and Milton, while our attempts in
 history or science were yet in their infancy; and deserve our
 attention, only for the sake of the matter they treat.
     Hillanicus, who is reckoned among the first prose writers in
 Greece, and who immediately preceded, or was the contemporary of
 Herodotus, set out with declaring his intention to remove from
 history the wild representations, and extravagant fictions, with
 which it had been disgraced by the poets.(23*) The want of
 records or authorities, relating to any distant transactions, may
 have hindered him, as it did his immediate successor, from giving
 truth all the advantage it might have reaped from this transition
 to prose. There are, however, ages in the progress of society,
 when such a proposition must be favourably received. When men
 become occupied on the subjects of policy, or commercial arts,
 they wish to be informed and instructed, as well as moved. They
 are interested by what was real in past transactions. They build
 on this foundation, the reflections and reasonings they apply to
 present affairs, and wish to receive information on the subject
 of different pursuits, and of projects in which they begin to be
 engaged. The manners of men, the practice of ordinary life, and
 the form of society, furnish their subjects to the moral and
 political writer. Mere ingenuity, justness of sentiment, and
 correct representation, though conveyed in ordinary language, are
 understood to constitute literary merit, and by applying to
 reason more than to the imagination and passions, meet with a
 reception that is due to the instruction they bring.
     The talents of men come to be employed in a variety of
 affairs, and their inquiries directed to different subjects.
 Knowledge is important in every department of civil society, and
 requisite to the practice of every art. The science of nature,
 morals, politics, and history, find their several admirers; and
 even poetry itself, which retains its former station in the
 region of warm imagination and enthusiastic passion, appears in a
 growing variety of forms.
     Matters have proceeded so far, without the aid of foreign
 examples, or the direction of schools. The cart of Thespis was
 changed into a theatre, not to gratify the learned, but to please
 the Athenian populace: and the prize of poetical merit was
 decided by this populace equally before and after the invention
 of rules. The Greeks were unacquainted with every language but
 their own; and if they became learned, it was only by studying
 what they themselves had produced: the childish mythology, which
 they are said to have copied from Asia, was equally of little
 avail in promoting their love of arts, or their success in the
 practice of them.
     When the historian is struck with the events he has
 witnessed, or heard; when he is excited to relate them by his
 reflections or his passions; when the statesman, who is required
 to speak in public, is obliged to prepare for every remarkable
 appearance in studied harangues; when conversation becomes
 extensive and refined; and when the social feelings and
 reflections of men are committed to writing, a system of learning
 may arise from the bustle of an active life. Society itself is
 the school, and its lessons are delivered in the practice of real
 affairs. An author writes from observations he has made on his
 subject, not from the suggestion of books; and every production
 carries the mark of his character as a man, not of his mere
 proficiency as a student or scholar. It may be made a question,
 whether the trouble of seeking for distant models, and of wading
 for instruction, through dark allusions and languages unknown,
 might not have quenched his fire, and rendered him a writer of a
 very inferior class.
     If society may thus be considered as a school for letters, it
 is probable that its lessons are varied in every separate state,
 and in every age. For a certain period, the severe applications
 of the Roman people to policy and war suppressed the literary
 arts, and appear to have stifled the genius even of the historian
 and the poet. The institutions of Sparta gave a professed
 contempt for whatever was not connected with the practical
 virtues of a vigorous and resolute spirit: the charms of
 imagination, and the parade of language, were by this people
 classed with the arts of the cook and the perfumer: their songs
 in praise of fortitude are mentioned by some writers; and
 collections of their witty saying and repartees are still
 preserved: they indicate the virtues and the abilities of an
 active people, not their proficiency in science or literary
 taste. Possessed of what was essential to happiness in the
 virtues of the heart, they had a discernment of its value,
 unimbarrassed by the numberless objects on which mankind in
 general are so much at a loss to adjust their esteem: fixed in
 their own apprehension, they turned a sharp edge on the follies
 of mankind. 'When will you begin to practise it?' was the
 question of a Spartan to a person who, in an advanced age of
 life, was still occupied with questions on the nature of virtue.
     While this people confined their studies to one question, How
 to improve and to preserve the courage and the disinterested
 affections of the human heart? their rivals the Athenians gave a
 scope to refinement on every object of reflection or passion. By
 the rewards, either of profit or of reputation, which they
 bestowed on every effort of ingenuity employed in ministering to
 the pleasure, the decoration, or the conveniency of life; by the
 variety of conditions in which their citizens were placed; by
 their inequalities of fortune, and their several pursuits in war,
 politics, commerce, and lucrative arts, they awakened whatever
 was either good or bad in the natural dispositions of men. Every
 road to eminence was opened: eloquence, fortitude, military
 skill, envy, detraction, faction, and treason, even the muse
 herself, was courted to bestow importance among a busy, acute,
 and turbulent people.
     From this example, we may safely conclude, that although
 business is sometimes a rival to study, retirement and leisure
 are not the principal requisites to the improvement, perhaps not
 even to the exercise, of literary talents. The most striking
 exertions of imagination and sentiment have a reference to
 mankind: they are excited by the presence and intercourse of men:
 they have most vigour when actuated in the mind by the operation
 of its principal springs, by the emulations, the friendships, and
 the oppositions, which subsist among a forward and aspiring
 people. Amidst the great occasions which put a free, and even a
 licentious, society in motion, its members become capable of
 every exertion; and the same scenes which gave employment to
 Themistocles and Thrasybulus, inspired, by contagion, the genius
 of Sophocles and Plato. The petulant and the ingenuous find an
 equal scope to their talents; and literary monuments become the
 repositories of envy and folly, as well as of wisdom and virtue.
     Greece, divided into many little states, and agitated, beyond
 any spot on the globe, by domestic contentions and foreign wars,
 set the example in every species of literature. The fire was
 communicated to Rome; not when the state ceased to be warlike,
 and had discontinued her political agitations, but when she mixed
 the love of refinement and of pleasure with her national
 pursuits, and indulged an inclination to study in the midst of
 ferments, occasioned by the wars and pretensions of opposite
 factions. It was revived in modern Europe among the turbulent
 states of Italy, and spread to the North, together with the
 spirit which shook the fabric of the Gothic policy. it rose while
 men were divided into parties, under civil or religious
 denominations, and when they were at variance on subjects held
 the most important and sacred.
     We may be satisfied, from the example of many ages, that
 liberal endowments bestowed on learned societies, and the leisure
 with which they were furnished for study, are not the likeliest
 means to excite the exertions of genius: even science itself, the
 supposed offspring of leisure, pined in the shade of monastic
 retirement. Men at a distance from the objects of useful
 knowledge, untouched by the motives that animate an active and a
 vigorous mind, could produce only the jargon of a technical
 language, and accumulate the impertinence of academical forms.
     To speak or to write justly from an observation of nature, it
 is necessary to have felt the sentiments of nature. He who is
 penetrating and ardent in the conduct of life, will probably
 exert a proportional force and ingenuity in the exercise of his
 literary talents: and although writing may become a trade, and
 require all the application and study which are bestowed on any
 other calling; yet the principal requisites in this calling are,
 the spirit and sensibility of a vigorous mind.
     In one period, the school may take its light and direction
 from active life; in another, it is true, the remains of an
 active spirit are greatly supported by literary monuments, and by
 the history of transactions that preserve the examples and the
 experience of former and of better times. But in whatever manner
 men are formed for great efforts of elocution or conduct, it
 appears the most glaring of all other deceptions, to look for the
 accomplishments of a human character in the mere attainments of
 speculation, whilst we neglect the qualities of fortitude and
 public affection, which are so necessary to render our knowledge
 an article of happiness or of use.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. See Russian Atlas.
 
 2. The Tchutzi.
 
 3. Notes to the Genealogical History of the Tartars.
 
 4. D'Arvieux.
 
 5. Charlevoix.
 
 6. The Dutch sailors who were employed in the siege of Malaco,
 tore or burnt the sail-cloth which was given them to make tents,
 that they might not have the trouble of making or pitching them.
 Voy. de Matelief.
 
 7. Compare the state of Hungary with that of Holland.
 
 8. De Retz Memoirs.
 
 9. Part I, sect. 10.
 
 10. See Dr Robertson's History of Scotland, b. 1.
 
 11. Collection of Dutch Voyages.
 
 12. Strahlenberg.
 
 13. Dampier.
 
 14. Xenophon.
 
 15. Thucydides, book 1.
 
 16. Polybius.
 
 17. In Britain, by the suspension of Habeas corpus.
 
 18. D'Arvieux's History of the Arabs.
 
 19. Plutarch in the life of Solon. -- Livy.
 
 20. See part 2, sect. 2.
 
 21. Aristotle.
 
 22. See Longinus.
 
 23. Quoted by Demetrius Phalerius.
 
 
 