




Part Fifth.
 
 Of the Decline of Nations.
 
 Section I
 
 Of supposed National Eminence and of the Vicissitudes of Human
 Affairs
 
     No nation is so unfortunate as to think itself inferior to
 the rest of mankind: few are even willing to put up with the
 claim to equality. The greater part having chosen themselves, as
 at once, the judges and the models of what is excellent in their
 kind, are first in their own opinion, and give to others
 consideration or eminence, so far only as they approach to their
 own condition. One nation is vain of the personal character, or
 of the learning, of a few of its members; another, of its policy,
 its wealth, its tradesmen, its gardens, and its buildings; and
 they who have nothing to boast, are vain, because they are
 ignorant. The Russians, before the reign of Peter the Great,
 thought themselves possessed of every national honour, and held
 the Nenei, or dumb nations, (the name which they bestowed on
 their western neighbours of Europe), in a proportional degree of
 contempt.(1*) The map of the world, in China, was a square plate,
 the greater part of which was occupied by the provinces of this
 great empire, leaving on its skirts a few obscure corners, into
 which the wretched remainder of mankind were supposed to be
 driven. 'If you have not the use of our letters, nor the
 knowledge of our books,' said the learned Chinese to the European
 missionary, 'what literature, or what science, can you have?(2*)
     The term polished, if we may judge from its etymology,
 originally referred to the state of nations in respect to their
 laws and government. In its later applications, it refers no less
 to their proficiency in the liberal and mechanical arts, in
 literature, and in commerce. But whatever may be its application,
 it appears, that if there were a name still more respectable than
 this, every nation, even the most barbarous, or the most
 corrupted, would assume it; and bestow its reverse where they
 conceived a dislike, or apprehended a difference. The names of
 alien, or foreigner, are seldom pronounced without some degree of
 intended reproach. That of barbarian, in use with one arrogant
 people, and that of gentil, with another, only served to
 distinguish the stranger, whose language and pedigree differed
 from theirs.
     Even where we pretend to found our opinions on reason, and to
 justify our preference of one nation to another, we frequently
 bestow our esteem on circumstances which do not relate to
 national character, and which have little tendency to promote the
 welfare of mankind. Conquest, or great extent of territory,
 however peopled, and great wealth, however distributed or
 employed, are titles upon which we indulge our own, and the
 vanity of other nations, as we do that of private men on the
 score of their fortunes and honours. We even sometimes contend,
 whose capital is the most overgrown; whose king has the most
 absolute power; and at whose court the bread of the subject is
 consumed in the most senseless riot. These indeed are the notions
 of vulgar minds; but it is impossible to determine, how far the
 notions of vulgar minds may lead mankind.
     There have certainly been very few examples of states, who
 have, by arts or policy, improved the original dispositions of
 human nature, or endeavoured, by wise and effectual precautions,
 to prevent its corruption. Affection, and force of mind, which
 are the band and the strength of communities, were the
 inspiration of God, and original attributes in the nature of man.
 The wisest policy of nations, except in a very few instances, has
 tended, we may suspect, rather to maintain the peace of society,
 and to repress the external effects of bad passions, than to
 strengthen the disposition of the heart itself to justice and
 goodness. It has tended, by introducing a variety of arts, to
 exercise the ingenuity of men, and by engaging them in a variety
 of pursuits, inquiries, and studies, to inform, but frequently to
 corrupt the mind. It has tended to furnish matter of distinction
 and vanity; and by incumbering the individual with new subjects
 of personal care, to substitute the anxiety he entertains for
 himself, instead of the confidence and the affection he should
 entertain for his fellow-creatures.
     Whether this suspicion be just or no, we are come to point at
 circumstances tending to verify, or to disprove it: and if to
 understand the real felicity of nations be of importance, it is
 certainly so likewise, to know what are those weaknesses, and
 those vices, by which men not only mar this felicity, but in one
 age forfeit all the external advantages they had gained in a
 former.
     The wealth, the aggrandizement and power of nations, are
 commonly the effects of virtue; the loss of these advantages, is
 often a consequence of vice.
     Were we to suppose men to have succeeded in the discovery and
 application of every art by which states are preserved, and
 governed; to have attained, by efforts of wisdom and magnanimity,
 the admired establishments and advantages of a civilized and
 flourishing people; the subsequent part of their history,
 containing, according to vulgar apprehension, a full display of
 those fruits in maturity, of which they had till then carried
 only the blossom, and the first formation, should, still more
 than the former, merit our attention, and excite our admiration.
     The event, however, has not corresponded to this expectation.
 The virtues of men have shone most during their struggles, not
 after the attainment of their ends. Those ends themselves, though
 attained by virtue, are frequently the causes of corruption and
 vice. Mankind, in aspiring to national felicity, have substituted
 arts which increase their riches, instead of those which improve
 their nature. They have entertained admiration of themselves,
 under the titles of civilized and of polished, where they should
 have been affected with shame; and even where they have for a
 while acted on maxims tending to raise, to invigorate, and to
 preserve the national character, they have, sooner or later, been
 diverted from their object, and fallen a prey to misfortune, or
 to the neglects which prosperity itself had encouraged.
     War, which furnishes mankind with a principal occupation of
 their restless spirit, serves, by the variety of its events, to
 diversify their fortunes. While it opens to one tribe or society,
 the way to eminence, and leads to dominion, it brings another to
 subjection, and closes the scene of their national efforts.The
 celebrated rivalship of Carthage and Rome was, in both parties,
 the natural exercise of an ambitious spirit, impatient of
 opposition, or even of equality. The conduct and the fortune of
 leaders, held the balance for some time in suspense; but to
 whichever side it had inclined, a great nation was to fall; a
 seat of empire, and of policy, was to be removed from its place;
 and it was then to be determined, whether the Syriac or the Latin
 should contain the erudition that was, in future ages, to occupy
 the studies of the learned.
     States have been thus conquered from abroad, before they gave
 any signs of internal decay, even in the midst of prosperity, and
 in the period of their greatest ardour for national objects.
 Athens, in the height of her ambition, and of her glory, received
 a fatal wound, in striving to extend her maritime power beyond
 the Grecian seas. And nations of every description, formidable by
 their rude ferocity, respected for their discipline and military
 experience, when advancing, as well as when declining, in their
 strength, fell a prey, by turns, to the ambition and arrogant
 spirit of the Romans. Such examples may excite and alarm the
 jealousy and caution of states; the presence of similar dangers
 may exercise the talents of politicians and statesmen; but mere
 reverses of fortune are the common materials of history, and must
 long since have ceased to create our surprise.
     Did we find, that nations advancing from small beginnings,
 and arrived at the possession of arts which lead to dominion,
 became secure of their advantages, in proportion as they were
 qualified to gain them; that they proceeded in a course of un.
 interrupted felicity, till they were broke by external
 calamities; and that they retained their force, till a more
 fortunate or vigorous power arose to depress them; the subject in
 speculation could not be attended with many difficulties, nor
 give rise to many reflections. But when we observe among nations
 a kind of spontaneous return to obscurity and weakness; when, in
 spite of perpetual admonitions of the danger they run, they
 suffer themselves to be subdued, in one period, by powers which
 could not have entered into competition with them in a former,
 and by forces which they had often baffled and despised; the
 subject becomes more curious, and its explanation more difficult.
     The fact itself is known in a variety of different examples.
 The empire of Asia was, more than once, transferred from the
 greater to the inferior power. The states of Greece, once so
 warlike, felt a relaxation of their vigour, and yielded the
 ascendant they had disputed with the monarchs of the east, to the
 forces of an obscure principality, become formidable in a few
 years, and raised to eminence under the conduct of a single man.
 The Roman empire, which stood alone for ages; which had brought
 every rival under subjection, and saw no power from whom a
 competition could be feared, sunk at last before an artless and
 contemptible enemy. Abandoned to inroad, to pillage, and at last
 to conquest, on her frontier, she decayed in all her extremities,
 and shrunk on every side. Her territory was dismembered, and
 whole provinces gave way, like branches fallen down with age, not
 violently torn by superior force. The spirit with which Marius
 had baffled and repelled the attacks of barbarians in a former
 age, the civil and military force with which the consul and his
 legions had extended this empire, were now no more. The Roman
 greatness, doomed to sink as it rose, by slow degrees, was
 impaired in every encounter. It was reduced to its original
 dimensions, within the compass of a single city; and depending
 for its preservation on the fortune of a siege, it was
 extinguished at a blow; and the brand, which had filled the world
 with its flames, sunk like a taper in the socket.
     Such appearances have given rise to a general apprehension,
 that the progress of societies to what we call the heights of
 national greatness, is not more natural, than their return to
 weakness and obscurity is necessary and unavoidable. The images
 of youth, and of old age, are applied to nations; and
 communities, like single men, are supposed to have a period of
 life, and a length of thread, which is spun by the fates in one
 part uniform and strong, in another weakened and shattered by
 use; to be cut, when the destined aera is come, and to make way
 for a renewal of the emblem in the case of those who arise in
 succession. Carthage, being so much older than Rome, had felt her
 decay, says Polybius, so much the sooner. and the survivor too,
 he foresaw, carried in her bosom the seeds of mortality.
     The image indeed is apposite, and the history of mankind
 renders the application familiar. But it must be obvious, that
 the case of nations, and that of individuals, are very different.
 The human frame has a general course; it has, in every
 individual, a frail contexture, and a limited duration; it is
 worn by exercise, and exhausted by a repetition of its functions.
 But in a society, whose constituent members are renewed in every
 generation, where the race seems to enjoy perpetuated youth, and
 accumulating advantages, we cannot, by any parity of reason,
 expect to find imbecilities connected with mere age and length of
 days.
     The subject is not new, and reflections will croud upon every
 reader. The notions, in the mean time, which we entertain, even
 in speculation, upon a subject so important, cannot be entirely
 fruitless to mankind; and however little the labours of the
 speculative may influence the conduct of men, one of the most
 pardonable errors a writer can commit, is to believe that he is
 about to do a great deal of good. But leaving the care of effects
 to others, we proceed to consider the grounds of inconstancy
 among mankind, the sources of internal decay, and the ruinous
 corruptions to which nations are liable, in the supposed
 condition of accomplished civility.
 
 
 Section II.
 
 Of the Temporary Efforts and Relaxations of the National Spirit.
 
     From what we have already observed on the general
 characteristics of human nature, it has appeared, that man is not
 made for repose. In him, every amiable and respectable quality is
 an active power, and every subject of commendation an effort. If
 his errors and his crimes are the movements of an active being,
 his virtues and his happiness consist likewise in the employment
 of his mind; and all the lustre which he casts around him, to
 captivate or engage the attention of his fellow-creatures, like
 the flame of a meteor, shines only while his motion continues:
 the moments of rest and of obscurity are the same. We know, that
 the talks assigned him frequently may exceed, as well as come
 short of his powers; that he may be agitated too much, as well as
 too little; but cannot ascertain a precise medium between the
 situations in which he would be harassed, and those 'in which he
 would fall into languor. We know, that he may be employed on a
 great variety of subjects, which occupy different passions; and
 that, in consequence of habit, he becomes reconciled to very
 different scenes. All we can determine in general is, that
 whatever be the subjects with which he is engaged, the frame of
 his nature requires him to be occupied, and his happiness
 requires him to be just.
     We are now to inquire, why nations cease to be eminent; and
 why societies which have drawn the attention of mankind by great
 examples of magnanimity, conduct, and national success, should
 sink from the height of their honours, and yield, in one age, the
 palm which they had won in a former. Many reasons will probably
 occur. One may be taken from the fickleness and inconstancy of
 mankind, who become tired of their pursuits and exertions, even
 while the occasions that gave rise to those pursuits, in some
 measure continue: Another, from the change of situations, and the
 removal of objects which served to excite their spirit.
     The public safety, and the relative interests of states;
 political establishments, the pretensions of party, commerce, and
 arts, are subjects which engage the attention of nations. The
 advantages gained in some of these particulars, determine the
 degree of national prosperity. The ardour and vigour with which
 they are at any one time pursued, is the measure of a national
 spirit. When those objects cease to animate, nations may be said
 to languish; when they are during any considerable time
 neglected, states must decline, and their people degenerate.
     In the most forward, enterprising, inventive, and industrious
 nations, this spirit is fluctuating; and they who continue
 longest to gain advantages, or to preserve them, have periods of
 remissness, as well as of ardour. The desire of public safety,
 is, at all times, a powerful motive of conduct; but it operates
 most, when combined with occasional passions, when provocations
 inflame, when successes encourage, or mortifications exasperate.
     A whole people, like the individuals of whom they are
 composed, act under the influence of temporary humours, sanguine
 hopes, or vehement animosities. They are disposed, at one time,
 to enter on national struggles with vehemence; at another, to
 drop them from mere lassitude and disgust. In their civil debates
 and contentions at home, they are occasionally ardent or remiss.
 Epidemical passions arise or subside, on trivial, as well as
 important, grounds. Parties are ready, at one time, to take their
 names, and the pretence of their oppositions, from mere caprice
 or accident; at another time, they suffer the most serious
 occasions to pass in silence. If a vein of literary genius be
 casually opened, or a new subject of disquisition be started,
 real or pretended discoveries suddenly multiply, and every
 conversation is inquisitive and animated. If a new source of
 wealth be found, or a prospect of conquest be offered, the
 imaginations of men are inflamed, and whole quarters of the globe
 are suddenly engaged in ruinous or in successful adventures.
     Could we recall the spirit that was exerted, or enter into
 the views that were entertained, by our ancestors, when they
 burst, like a deluge, from their ancient seats, and poured into
 the Roman empire, we should probably, after their first
 successes, at least, find a ferment in the minds of men, for
 which no attempt was too arduous, no difficulties insurmountable.
     The subsequent ages of enterprise in Europe, were those in
 which the alarm of enthusiasm was rung, and the followers of the
 cross invaded the East, to plunder a country, and to recover a
 sepulchre; those in which the people in different states
 contended for freedom, and assaulted the fabric of civil or
 religious usurpation; that in which having found means to cross
 the Atlantic, and to double the cape of Good Hope, the
 inhabitants of one half the world were let loose on the other,
 and parties from every quarter, wading in blood, and at the
 expence of every crime, and of every danger, traversed the earth
 in search of gold.
     Even the weak and the remiss are roused to enterprise, by the
 contagion of such remarkable ages; and states which have not in
 their form the principles of a continued exertion, either
 favourable or adverse to the welfare of mankind, may have
 paroxysms of ardour, and a temporary appearance of national
 vigour. In the case of such nations, indeed, the returns of
 moderation are but a relapse to obscurity, and the presumption of
 one age is turned to dejection in that which succeeds.
     But in the case of states that are fortunate in their
 domestic policy, even madness itself may, in the result of
 violent convulsions, subside into wisdom; and a people return to
 their ordinary mood, cured of their follies, and wiser by
 experience: or, with talents improved, in conducting the very
 scenes which frenzy had opened, they may then appear best
 qualified to pursue with success the object of nations. Like the
 ancient republics, immediately after some alarming sedition, or
 like the kingdom of Great Britain, at the close of its civil
 wars, they retain the spirit of activity, which was recently
 awakened, and are equally vigorous in every pursuit, whether of
 policy, learning, or arts. From having appeared on the brink of
 ruin, they pass to the greatest prosperity.
     Men engage in pursuits with degrees of ardour not
 proportioned to the importance of their object. When they are
 stated in opposition, or joined in confederacy, they only wish
 for pretences to act. They forget, in the heat of their
 animosities, the subject of their controversy; or they seek, in
 their formal reasonings concerning it, only a disguise for their
 passions. When the heart is inflamed, no consideration can
 repress its ardour; when its fervour subsides, no reasoning can
 excite, and no eloquence awaken, its former emotions.
     The continuance of emulation among states, must depend on the
 degree of equality by which their forces are balanced; or on the
 incentives by which either party, or all, are urged to continue
 their struggles. Long intermissions of war, suffer, equally in
 every period of civil society, the military spirit to languish.
 The reduction of Athens by Lysander, struck a fatal blow at the
 institutions of Lycurgus; and the quiet possession of Italy,
 happily, perhaps, for mankind, had almost put an end to the
 military progress of the Romans. After some years of repose,
 Hannibal found Italy unprepared for his onset, and the Romans in
 a disposition likely to drop, on the banks of the Po, that
 martial ambition, which, being roused by the sense of a new
 danger, afterwards carried them to the Euphrates and the Rhine.
     States even distinguished for military prowess, sometimes lay
 down their arms from lassitude, and are weary of fruitless
 contentions: but if they maintain the station of independent
 communities, they will have frequent occasions to recall, and
 exert their vigour. Even under popular governments, men sometimes
 drop the consideration of their political rights, and appear at
 times remiss or supine; but if they have reserved the power to
 defend themselves, the intermission of its exercise cannot be of
 long duration. Political rights, when neglected, are always
 invaded; and alarms from this quarter must frequently come to
 renew the attention of parties. The love of learning, and of
 arts, may change its pursuits, or droop for a season; but while
 men are possessed of freedom, and while the exercises of
 ingenuity are not superseded, the public may proceed, at
 different times, with unequal fervour; but its progress is seldom
 altogether discontinued, or the advantages gained in one age are
 seldom entirely lost to the following.
     If we would find the causes of final corruption, we must
 examine those revolutions of state that remove or with-hold the
 objects of every ingenious study, or liberal pursuit; that
 deprive the citizen of occasions to act as the member of a
 public; that crush his spirit; that debase his sentiments, and
 disqualify his mind for affairs.
 
 Section III.
 
 Of Relaxations in the National Spirit incident to Polished
 Nations.
 
 
     Improving nations, in the course of their advancement, have
 to struggle with foreign enemies, to whom they bear an extreme
 animosity, and with whom, in many conflicts, they contend for
 their existence as a people. In certain periods too, they feel in
 their domestic policy inconveniencies and grievances, which beget
 an eager impatience; and they apprehend reformations and new
 establishments, from which they have sanguine hopes of national
 happiness. In early ages, every art is imperfect, and susceptible
 of many improvements. The first principles of every science are
 yet secrets to be discovered, and to be successively published
 with applause and triumph.
     We may fancy to ourselves, that in ages of progress, the
 human race, like scouts gone abroad on the discovery of fertile
 lands, having the world open before them, are presented at every
 step with the appearance of novelty. They enter on every new
 ground with expectation and joy: They engage in every enterprise
 with the ardour of men, who believe they are going to arrive at
 national felicity, and permanent glory; and forget past
 disappointments amidst the hopes of future success. From mere
 ignorance; rude minds are intoxicated with every passion; and
 partial to their own condition, and to their own pursuits, they
 think that every scene is inferior to that in which they are
 placed. Roused alike by success, and by misfortune, they are
 sanguine, ardent, and precipitant; and leave to the more knowing
 ages  which succeed them, monuments of imperfect skill, and of
 rude execution in every art; but they leave likewise the marks of
 a vigorous and ardent spirit, which their successors are not
 always qualified to sustain, or to imitate.
     This may be admitted, perhaps, as a fair description of
 prosperous societies, at least during certain periods of their
 progress. The spirit with which they advance may be unequal, in
 different ages, and may have its paroxysms, and intermissions,
 arising from the inconstancy of human passions, and from the
 casual appearance or removal of occasions that excite them. But
 does this spirit, which for a time continues to carry on the
 project of civil and commercial arts, find a natural pause in the
 termination of its own pursuits? May the business of civil
 society be accomplished, and may the occasion of farther exertion
 be removed? Do continued disappointments reduce sanguine hopes,
 and familiarity with objects blunt the edge of novelty? Does
 experience itself cool the ardour of the mind? May the society be
 again compared to the individual? And may it be suspected,
 although the vigour of a nation, like that of a natural body,
 does not waste by a physical decay, that yet it may sicken for
 want of exercise, and die in the close of its own exertions? May
 societies, in the completion of all their designs, like men in
 years, who disregard the amusements, and are insensible to the
 passions, of youth, become cold and indifferent to objects that
 used to animate in a ruder age? And may a polished community be
 compared to a man, who having executed his plan, built his house,
 and made his settlement; who having, in short, exhausted the
 charms of every subject, and wasted all his ardour, sinks into
 languor and listless indifference? If so, we have found at least
 another simile to our purpose. But it is probable, that here too,
 the resemblance is imperfect; and the inference that would
 follow, like that of most arguments drawn from analogy, tends
 rather to amuse the fancy, than to give any real information on
 the subject to which it refers.
     The materials of human art are never entirely exhausted, and
 the applications of industry are never at an end. The national
 ardour is not, at any particular time, proportioned to the
 occasion there is for activity; nor curiosity to the extent of
 subject that remains to be studied.
     The ignorant and the artless, to whom objects of science are
 new, and who are worst furnished with the conveniencies of life,
 instead of being more active, and more curious, are commonly more
 quiescent, and less inquisitive, than the knowing and the
 polished. When we compare the particulars which occupy mankind in
 their rude and in their polished condition, they will be found
 greatly multiplied and enlarged in the last. The questions we
 have put, however, deserve to be answered; and if, in the
 advanced ages of society, we do not find the objects of human
 pursuit removed, or greatly diminished, we may find them at least
 changed; and in estimating the national spirit, we may find a
 negligence in one part, but ill compensated by the growing
 attention which is paid to another.
     It is true, in general, that in all our pursuits, there is a
 termination of trouble, and a point of repose to which we aspire.
 We would remove this inconvenience, or gain that advantage, that
 our labours may cease. When I have conquered Italy and Sicily,
 says Pyrrhus, I shall then enjoy my repose. This termination is
 proposed in our national as well as in our personal exertions;
 and in spite of frequent experience to the contrary, is
 considered at a distance as the height of felicity. But nature
 has wisely, in most particulars, baffled our project; and placed
 no where within our reach this visionary blessing of absolute
 ease. The attainment of one end is but the beginning of a new
 pursuit; and the discovery of one art is but a prolongation of
 the thread by which we are conducted to further inquiries, and
 only hope to escape from the labyrinth.
     Among the occupations that may be enumerated, as tending to
 exercise the invention, and to cultivate the talents of men, are
 the pursuits of accommodation and wealth, including all the
 different contrivances which serve to increase manufactures, and
 to perfect the mechanical arts. But it must be owned, that as the
 materials of commerce may continue to be accumulated without any
 determinate limit, so the arts which are applied to improve them,
 may admit of perpetual refinements. No measure of fortune, or
 degree of skill, is found to diminish the supposed necessities of
 human life; refinement and plenty foster new desires, while they
 furnish the means, or practise the methods, to gratify them.
     In the result of commercial arts, inequalities of fortune are
 greatly increased, and the majority of every people are obliged
 by necessity, or at least strongly incited by ambition and
 avarice, to employ every talent they possess. After a history of
 some thousand years employed in manufacture and commerce, the
 inhabitants of China are still the most laborious and industrious
 of any people on the surface of the earth.
     Some part of this observation may be extended to the elegant
 and literary arts. They too have their materials, which cannot be
 exhausted, and proceed from desires which cannot be satiated. But
 the respect paid to literary merit is fluctuating, and matter of
 transient fashion. When learned productions accumulate, the
 acquisition of knowledge occupies the time that might be bestowed
 on invention. The object of mere learning is attained with
 moderate or inferior talents, and the growing list of pretenders
 diminishes the lustre of the few who are eminent. When we only
 mean to learn what others have taught, it is probable, that even
 our knowledge will be less than that of our masters. Great names
 continue to be repeated with admiration, after we have ceased to
 examine the foundations of our praise: and new pretenders are
 rejected, not because they fall short of their predecessors, but
 because they do not excel them; or because, in reality, we have,
 without examination, taken for granted the merit of the first,
 and cannot judge of either.
     After libraries are furnished, and every path of ingenuity is
 occupied, we are, in proportion to our admiration of what is
 already done, prepossessed against farther attempts, We become
 students and admirers, instead of rivals; and substitute the
 knowledge of books, instead of the inquisitive or animated spirit
 in which they were written.
     The commercial and lucrative arts may continue to prosper,
 but they gain an ascendant at the expence of other pursuits. The
 desire of profit stifles the love of perfection. interest cools
 the imagination, and hardens the heart; and, recommending
 employments in proportion as they are lucrative, and certain in
 their gains, it drives ingenuity, and ambition itself, to the
 counter and the workshop.
     But apart from these considerations, the separation of
 professions, while it seems to promise improvement of skill, and
 is actually the cause why the productions of every art become
 more perfect as commerce advances; yet in its termination, and
 ultimate effects, serves, in some measure, to break the bands of
 society, to substitute form in place of ingenuity, and to
 withdraw individuals from the common scene of occupation, on
 which the sentiments of the heart, and the mind, are most happily
 employed.
     Under the distinction of callings, by which the members of
 polished society are separated from each other, every individual
 is supposed to possess his species of talent, or his peculiar
 skill, in which the others are confessedly ignorant; and society
 is made to consist of parts, of which none is animated with the
 spirit of society itself. 'We see in the same persons,' said
 Pericles, 'an equal attention to private and to public affairs;
 and in men who have turned to separate professions, a competent
 knowledge of what relates to the community; for we alone consider
 those who are inattentive to the state, as perfectly
 insignificant.' This encomium on the Athenians, was probably
 offered under an apprehension, that the contrary was likely to be
 charged by their enemies, or might soon take place. It happened
 accordingly, that the business of state, as well as of war, came
 to be worse administered at Athens, when these, as well as other
 applications, became the objects of separate professions; and the
 history of this people abundantly shewed, that men ceased to be
 citizens, even to be good poets and orators, in proportion as
 they came to be distinguished by the profession of these, and
 other separate crafts.
     Animals less honoured than we, have sagacity enough to
 procure their food, and to find the means of their solitary
 pleasures; but it is reserved for man to consult, to persuade, to
 oppose, to kindle in the society of his fellow-creatures, and to
 lose the sense of his personal interest or safety, in the ardour
 of his friendships and his oppositions.
     When we are involved in any of the divisions into which
 mankind are separated, under the denominations of a country, a
 tribe, or an order of men any way affected by common interests,
 and guided by communicating passions, the mind recognises its
 natural station; the sentiments of the heart, and the talents of
 the understanding, find their natural exercise. Wisdom,
 vigilance, fidelity, and fortitude, are the characters requisite
 in such a scene, and the qualities which it tends to improve.
     In simple or barbarous ages, when nations are weak, and beset
 with enemies, the love of a country, of a party, or a faction,
 are the same. The public is a knot of friends, and its enemies
 are the rest of mankind. Death, or slavery, are the ordinary
 evils which they are concerned to ward off; victory and dominion,
 the objects to which they aspire. Under the sense of what they
 may suffer from foreign invasions, it is one object, in every
 prosperous society, to increase its force, and to extend its
 limits. I n proportion as this object is gained, security
 increases. They who possess the interior districts, remote from
 the frontier, are unused to alarms from abroad. They who are
 placed on the extremities, remote from the seats of government,
 are unused to hear of political interests; and the public becomes
 an object perhaps too extensive, for the conceptions of either.
 They enjoy the protection of its laws, or of its armies; and they
 boast of its splendor, and its power; but the glowing sentiments
 of public affection, which, in small states, mingle with the
 tenderness of the parent and the lover, of the friend and the
 companion, merely by having their object enlarged, lose great
 part of their force.
     The manners of rude nations require to be reformed. Their
 foreign quarrels, and domestic dissensions, are the operations of
 extreme and sanguinary passions. A state of greater tranquillity
 hath many happy effects. But if nations pursue the plan of
 enlargement and pacification, till their members can no longer
 apprehend the common ties of society, nor be engaged by affection
 in the cause of their country, they must err on the opposite
 side, and by leaving too little to agitate the spirits of men,
 bring on ages of languor, if not of decay.
     The members of a community may, in this manner, like the
 inhabitants of a conquered province, be made to lose the sense of
 every connection, but that of kindred or neighbourhood; and have
 no common affairs to transact, but those of trade: Connections,
 indeed, or transactions, in which probity and friendship may
 still take place; but in which the national spirit, whose ebbs
 and flows we are now considering, cannot be exerted.
     What we observe, however, on the tendency of enlargement to
 loosen the bands of political union, cannot be applied to nations
 who, being originally narrow, never greatly extended their
 limits, nor to those who, in a rude state, had already the
 extension of a great kingdom, In territories of considerable
 extent, subject to one government, and possessed of freedom, the
 national union, in rude ages, is extremely imperfect. Every
 district forms a separate party; and the descendents of different
 families are opposed to one another, under the denomination of
 tribes or of clans: they are seldom brought to act with a steady
 concert; their feuds and animosities give more frequently the
 appearance of so many nations at war, than of a people united by
 connections of policy, They acquire a spirit, however, in their
 private divisions, and in the midst of a disorder, otherwise
 hurtful, of which the force, on many occasions, redounds to the
 power of the state.
     Whatever be the national extent, civil order, and regular
 government, are advantages of the greatest importance; but it
 does not follow, that every arrangement made to obtain these
 ends, and which may, in the making, exercise and cultivate the
 best qualities of men, is therefore of a nature to produce
 permanent effects, and to secure the preservation of that
 national spirit from which it arose.
     We have reason to dread the political refinements of ordinary
 men, when we consider, that repose, or inaction itself, is in a
 great measure their object; and that they would frequently model
 their governments, not merely to prevent injustice and error, but
 to prevent agitation and bustle; and by the barriers they raise
 against the evil actions of men, would prevent them from acting
 at all. Every dispute of a free people, in the opinion of such
 politicians, amounts to disorder, and a breach of the national
 peace. What heart-burnings? What delay to affairs? What want of
 secrecy and dispatch? What defect of police? Men of superior
 genius sometimes seem to imagine, that the vulgar have no title
 to act, or to think. A great prince is pleased to ridicule the
 precaution by which judges in a free country are Confined to the
 strict interpretation of law.(3*)
     We easily learn to contract our opinions of what men may, in
 consistence with public order, be safely permitted to do. The
 agitations of a republic, and the licence of its members, strike
 the subjects of monarchy with aversion and disgust. The freedom
 with which the European is left to traverse the streets and the
 fields, would appear to a Chinese a sure prelude to confusion and
 anarchy. 'Can men behold their superior and not tremble? Can they
 converse without a precise and written ceremonial? What hopes of
 peace, if the streets are not barricaded at an hour? What wild
 disorder, if men are permitted in any thing to do what they
 please?' If the precautions which men thus take against each
 other be necessary to repress their crimes, and do not arise from
 a corrupt ambition, or from cruel jealousy in their rulers, the
 proceeding itself must be applauded, as the best remedy of which
 the vices of men will admit. The viper must be held at a
 distance, and the tyger chained. But if a rigorous policy,
 applied to enslave, not to restrain from crimes, has an actual
 tendency to corrupt the manners, and to extinguish the spirit of
 nations; if its severities be applied to terminate the agitations
 of a free people, not to remedy their corruptions; if forms be
 often applauded as salutary, because they tend merely to silence
 the voice of mankind, or be condemned as pernicious, because they
 allow this voice to be heard; we may expect that many of the
 boasted improvements of civil society, will be mere devices to
 lay the political spirit at rest, and will chain up the active
 virtues more than the restless disorders of men.
     If to any people it be the avowed object of policy, in all
 its internal refinements, to secure the person and the property
 of the subject, without any regard to his political character,
 the constitution indeed may be free, but its members may likewise
 become unworthy of the freedom they possess, and unfit to
 preserve it. The effects of such a constitution may be to immerse
 all orders of men in their separate pursuits of pleasure, which
 they may now enjoy with little disturbance; or of gain, which
 they may preserve without any attention to the Commonwealth. If
 this be the end of political struggles, the design, when
 executed, in securing to the individual his estate, and the means
 of subsistence, may put an end to the exercise of those very
 virtues that were required in conducting its execution. A man
 who, in concert with his fellow-subjects, contends with
 usurpation in defence of his estate or his person, may find an
 exertion of great generosity, and of a vigorous spirit; but he
 who, under political establishments, supposed to be fully
 confirmed, betakes him, because he is safe, to the mere enjoyment
 of fortune, has in fact turned to a source of corruption the very
 advantages which the virtues of the other procured. Individuals,
 in certain ages, derive their protection chiefly from the
 strength of the party to which they adhere; but in times of
 corruption, they flatter themselves, that they may continue to
 derive from the public that safety which, in former ages, they
 must have owed to their own vigilance and spirit, to the warm
 attachment of their friends, and to the exercise of every talent
 which could render them respected, feared, or beloved. In one
 period, therefore, mere circumstances serve to excite the spirit,
 and to preserve the manners of men; in another, great wisdom and
 zeal for the good of mankind on the part of their leaders, are
 required for the same purposes.
     Rome, it may be thought, did not die of a lethargy, nor
 perish by the remission of her political ardours at home. Her
 distemper appeared of a nature more violent and acute. Yet if the
 virtues of Cato and of Brutus found an exercise in the dying hour
 of the republic, the neutrality, and the cautious retirement of
 Atticus, found its security in the same tempestuous season; and
 the great body of the people lay undisturbed, below the current
 of a storm, by which the superior ranks of men were destroyed. In
 the minds of the people, the sense of a public was defaced; and
 even the animosity of faction had subsided: they only could share
 in the commotion, who were the soldiers of a legion, or the
 partisans of a leader. But this state fell not into obscurity for
 want of eminent men. If at the time of which we speak, we look
 only for a few names distinguished in the history of mankind,
 there is no period at which the list was more numerous. But those
 names became distinguished in the contest for dominion, not in
 the exercise of equal rights: the people was corrupted; the
 empire of the known world stood in need of a master.
     Republican governments, in general, are in hazard of ruin
 from the ascendant of particular factions, and from the mutinous
 spirit of a populace, who being corrupted, are no longer fit to
 share in the administration of state. But under other
 establishments, where liberty may be more successfully attained
 if men are corrupted, the national vigour declines from the abuse
 of that very security which is procured by the supposed
 perfection of public order.
     A distribution of power and office; an execution of law, by
 which mutual incroachments and molestations are brought to an
 end; by which the person and the property are, without friends,
 without cabal, without obligation, perfectly secured to
 individuals, does honour to the genius of a nation; and could not
 have been fully established, without those exertions of
 understanding and integrity, those trials of a resolute and
 vigorous spirit, which adorn the annals of a people, and leave to
 future ages a subject of just admiration and applause. But if we
 suppose that the end is attained, and that men no longer act, in
 the enjoyment of liberty, from liberal sentiments, or with a view
 to the preservation of public manners; if individuals think
 themselves secure without any attention or effort of their own;
 this boasted advantage may be found only to give them an
 opportunity of enjoying, at leisure, the conveniencies and
 necessaries of life; or, in the language of Cato, teach them to
 value their houses, their villas, their statues, and their
 pictures, at a higher rate than they do the republic. They may be
 found to grow tired in secret of a free constitution, of which
 they never cease to boast in their conversation, and which they
 always neglect in their conduct.
     The dangers to liberty are not the subject of our present
 consideration; but they can never be greater from any cause than
 they are from the supposed remissness of a people, to whose
 personal vigour every constitution, as it owed its establishment,
 so must continue to owe its preservation. Nor is this blessing
 ever less secure than it is in the possession of men who think
 that they enjoy it in safety, and who therefore consider the
 public only as it presents to their avarice a number of lucrative
 employments; for the sake of which they may sacrifice those very
 rights which render themselves objects of management or
 consideration.
     From the tendency of these reflections, then, it should
 appear, that a national spirit is frequently transient, not on
 account of any incurable distemper in the nature of mankind, but
 on account of their voluntary neglects and corruptions. This
 spirit subsisted solely, perhaps, in the execution of a few
 projects, entered into for the acquisition of territory or
 wealth; it comes, like a useless weapon, to be laid aside after
 its end is attained.
     Ordinary establishments terminate in a relaxation of vigour,
 and are ineffectual to the preservation of states; because they
 lead mankind to rely on their arts, instead of their virtues, and
 to mistake for an improvement of human nature, a mere accession
 of accommodation, or of riches. Institutions that fortify the
 mind, inspire courage, and promote national felicity, can never
 tend to national ruin.
     Is it not possible, amidst our admiration of arts, to find
 some place for these? Let statesmen, who are intrusted with the
 government of nations, reply for themselves. It is their business
 to shew, whether they climb into stations of eminence, merely to
 display a passion for interest, which they had better indulge in
 obscurity; and whether they have capacity to understand the
 happiness of a people, the conduct of whose affairs they are so
 willing to undertake.
 
 
 Section IV.
 
 The same subject continued.
 
     Men frequently, while they study to improve their fortunes,
 neglect themselves; and while they reason for their country,
 forget the considerations that most deserve their attention.
 Numbers, riches, and the other resources of war, are highly
 important: but nations consist of men; and a nation consisting of
 degenerate and cowardly men, is weak; a nation consisting of
 vigorous, public-spirited, and resolute men, is strong, The
 resources of war, where other advantages are equal, may decide a
 contest; but the resources of war, in hands that cannot employ
 them, are of no avail.
     Virtue is a necessary constituent of national strength:
 capacity, and a vigorous understanding, are no less necessary to
 sustain the fortune of states. Both are improved by discipline,
 and by the exercises in which men are engaged. We despise, or we
 pity, the lot of mankind, while they lived under uncertain
 establishments, and were obliged to sustain in the same person,
 the character of the senator, the statesman, and the soldier.
 Polished nations discover, that any one of these characters is
 sufficient in one person; and that the ends of each, when
 disjoined, are more easily accomplished. The first, however, were
 circumstances under which nations advanced and prospered; the
 second were those in which the spirit relaxed, and the nation
 went to decay.
     We may, with good reason, congratulate our species on their
 having escaped from a state of barbarous disorder and violence,
 into a state of domestic peace and regular policy; when they have
 sheathed the dagger, and disarmed the animosities of civil
 contention; when the weapons with which they contend are the
 reasonings of the wise, and the tongue of the eloquent. But we
 cannot, mean-time, help to regret, that they should ever proceed,
 in search of perfection, to place every branch of administration
 behind the counter, and come to employ, instead of the statesman
 and warrior, the mere clerk and accountant.
     By carrying this system to its height, men are educated, who
 could copy for Caesar his military instructions, or even execute
 a part of his plans; but none who could act in all the different
 sCenes for which the leader himself must be qualified, in the
 state and in the field, in times of order or of tumult, in times
 of division or of unanimity. none who could animate the council
 when deliberating on ordinary occasions, or when alarmed by
 attacks from abroad.
     The policy of China is the most perfect model of an
 arrangement, at which the ordinary refinements of government are
 aimed; and the inhabitants of this empire possess, in the highest
 degree, those arts on which vulgar minds make the felicity and
 greatness of nations to depend. The state has acquired, in a
 measure unequalled in the history of mankind, numbers of men, and
 the other resources of war. They have done what we are very apt
 to admire; they have brought national affairs to the level of the
 meanest capacity; they have broke them into parts, and thrown
 them into separate departments; they have clothed every
 proceeding with splendid ceremonies, and majestical forms; and
 where the reverence of forms cannot repress disorder, a rigorous
 and severe police, armed with every species of corporal
 punishment, is applied to the purpose. The whip, and the cudgel,
 are held up to all orders of men; they are at once employed, and
 they are dreaded by every magistrate. A mandarine is whipped, for
 having ordered a pickpocket to receive too few or too many blows.
     Every department of state is made the object of a separate
 profession, and every candidate for office must have passed
 through a regular education; and, as in the graduations of the
 university, must have obtained by his proficiency, or his
 standing, the degree to which he aspires. The tribunals of state,
 of war, and of the revenue, as well as of literature, are
 conducted by graduates in their different studies: but while
 learning is the great road to preferment, it terminates, in being
 able to read, and to write; and the great object of government
 consists in raising, and in consuming the fruits of the earth.
 With all these resources, and this learned preparation, which is
 made to turn these resources to use, the state is in reality
 weak; has repeatedly given the example which we seek to explain;
 and among the doctors of war or of policy, among the millions who
 are set apart for the military profession, can find none of its
 members who are fit to stand forth in the dangers of their
 country, or to form a defence against the repeated inroads of an
 enemy reputed to be artless and mean.
     It is difficult to tell how long the decay of states might be
 suspended by the cultivation of arts on which their real felicity
 and strength depend; by cultivating in the higher ranks those
 talents for the council and the field, which cannot, without
 great disadvantage, be separated; and in the body of a people,
 that zeal for their country, and that military character, which
 enable them to take a share in defending its rights.
     Times may come, when every proprietor must defend his own
 possessions, and every free people maintain their own
 independence. We may imagine, that against such an extremity, an
 army of hired troops is a sufficient precaution; but their own
 troops are the very enemy against which a people is sometimes
 obliged to fight. We may flatter ourselves, that extremities of
 this sort, in any particular case, are remote; but we cannot, in
 reasoning on the general fortunes of mankind, avoid putting the
 case, and referring to the examples in which it has happened. It
 has happened in every instance where the polished have fallen a
 prey to the rude, and where the pacific inhabitant has been
 reduced to subjection by military force.
     If the defence and government of a people be made to depend
 on a few, who make the conduct of state or of war their
 profession; whether these be foreigners or natives; whether they
 be called away of a sudden, like the Roman legion from Britain;
 whether they turn against their employers, like the army of
 Carthage, or be overpowered and dispersed by a stroke of fortune,
 the multitude of a cowardly and undisciplined people must, on
 such an emergence, receive a foreign or a domestic enemy, as they
 would a plague or an earthquake, with hopeless amazement and
 terror, and by their numbers, only swell the triumphs, and enrich
 the spoil of a conqueror.
     Statesmen and leaders of armies, accustomed to the mere
 observance of forms, are disconcerted by a suspension of
 customary rules; and on sight grounds despair of their country.
 They were qualified only to go the rounds of a particular track;
 and when forced from their stations, are in reality unable to act
 with men. They only took part in formalities, of which they
 understood not the tendency; and together with the modes of
 procedure, even the very state itself, in their apprehension, has
 ceased to exist. The numbers, possessions, and resources of a
 great people, only serve, in their view, to constitute a scene of
 hopeless confusion and terror.
     In rude ages, under the appellations of a community, a
 people, or a nation, was understood a number of men; and the
 state, while its members remained, was accounted entire. The
 Scythians, while they Jed before Darius, mocked at his childish
 attempt; Athens survived the devastations of Xerxes; and Rome, in
 its rude state, those of the Gauls. With polished and mercantile
 states, the case is sometimes reversed. The nation is a
 territory, cultivated and improved by its owners; destroy the
 possession, even while the master remains, the state is undone.
     That weakness and effeminacy of which polished nations are
 sometimes accused, has its place probably in the mind alone. The
 strength of animals, and that of man in particular, depends on
 his feeding, and the kind of labour to which he is used.
 Wholesome food, and hard labour, the portion of many in every
 polished and commercial nation, secure to the public a number of
 men endued with bodily strength, and inured to hardship and toil.
     Even delicate living, and good accommodation, are not found
 to enervate the body. The armies of Europe have been obliged to
 make the experiment; and the children of opulent families, bred
 in effeminacy, or nursed with tender care, have been made to
 contend with the savage. By imitating his arts, they have
 learned, like him, to traverse the forest; and, in every season,
 to subsist in the desert. They have, perhaps, recovered a lesson,
 which it has cost civilized nations many ages to unlearn, That
 the fortune of a man is entire while he remains possessed of
 himself.
     It may be thought, however, that few of the celebrated
 nations of antiquity, whose fate has given rise to so much
 reJection on the vicissitudes of human affairs, had made any
 great progress in those enervating arts we have mentioned; or
 made those arrangements from which the danger in question could
 be supposed to arise. The Greeks, in particular, at the time of
 their fall under the Macedonian yoke, had certainly not carried
 the commercial arts to so great a height as is common with the
 most flourishing and prosperous nations of Europe. They had still
 retained the form of independent republics; the people were
 generally admitted to a share in the government; and not being
 able to hire armies, they were obliged, by necessity, to bear a
 part in the defence of their country. By their frequent wars and
 domestic commotions, they were accustomed to danger, and were
 familiar with alarming situations: they were accordingly still
 accounted the best soldiers and the best statesmen of the known
 world. The younger Cyrus promised himself the empire of Asia by
 means of their aid; and after his fall, a body of ten thousand,
 although bereft of their leaders, baffled, in their retreat, all
 the military force of the Persian empire. The victor of Asia did
 not think himself prepared for that conquest, till he had formed
 an army from the subdued republics of Greece.
     It is, however, true, that in the age of Philip, the military
 and political spirit of those nations appears to have been
 considerably impaired, and to have suffered, perhaps, from the
 variety Of interests and pursuits, as well as of pleasures, with
 which their members came to be occupied: they even made a kind of
 separation between the civil and military character. Phocion, we
 are told by Plutarch, having observed that the leading men of his
 time followed different courses, that some applied themselves to
 civil, others to military affairs, determined rather to follow
 the examples of Themistocles, Aristides, and Pericles, the
 leaders of a former age, who were equally prepared for either.
     We find in the orations of Demosthenes, a perpetual reference
 to this state of manners. We find him exhorting the Athenians,
 not only to declare war, but to arm themselves for the execution
 of their own military plans, We find that there was an order of
 military men, who easily passed from the service of one state to
 that of another; and who, when they were neglected from home,
 turned away to enterprises on their own account. There were not,
 perhaps, better warriors in any former age; but those warriors
 were not attached to any state; and the settled inhabitants of
 every city thought themselves disqualified for military service.
 The discipline of armies was perhaps improved; but the vigour of
 nations was gone to decay. When Philip, or Alexander, defeated
 the Grecian armies, which were chiefly composed of soldiers of
 fortune, they found an easy conquest with the other inhabitants:
 and when the latter, afterwards supported by those soldiers,
 invaded the Persian empire, he seems to have left little martial
 spirit behind him; and by removing the military men, to have
 taken precaution enough, in his absence, to secure his dominion
 over this mutinous and refractory people.
     The subdivision of arts and professions, in certain examples,
 tends to improve the practice of them, and to promote their ends.
 By having separated the arts of the clothier and the tanner, we
 are the better supplied with shoes and with cloth. But to
 separate the arts which form the citizen and the statesman, the
 arts of policy and war, is an attempt to dismember the human
 character, and to destroy those very arts we mean to improve. By
 this separation, we in effect deprive a free people of what is
 necessary to their safety; or we prepare a defence against
 invasions from abroad, which gives a prospect of usurpation, and
 threatens the establishment of military government at home.
      We may be surprised to find the beginning of certain
 military instructions at Rome, referred to a time no earlier than
 that of the Cimbric war. It was then, we are told by Valerius
 Maximus, that Roman soldiers were made to learn from gladiators
 the use of a sword: and the antagonists of Phyrrhus and of
 Hannibal were, by the account of this writer, still in need of
 instruction in the first rudiments of their trade. They had
 already, by the order and choice of their incampments, impressed
 the Grecian invader with awe and respect; they had already, not
 by their victories, but by their national vigour and firmness,
 under repeated defeats, induced him to sue for peace. But the
 haughty Roman, perhaps, knew the advantage of order and of union,
 without having been broke to the inferior arts of the mercenary
 soldier; and had the courage to face the enemies of his country,
 without having practised the use of his weapon under the fear of
 being whipped. He could ill be persuaded, that a time might come,
 when refined and intelligent nations would make the art of war to
 consist in a few technical forms; that citizens and soldiers
 might come to be distinguished as much as women and men; that the
 citizen would become possessed of a property which he would not
 be able, or required, to defend; that the soldier would be
 appointed to keep for another what he would be taught to desire,
 and what he would be enabled to seize for himself; that, in
 short, one set of men were to have an interest in the
 preservation of civil establishments, without the power to defend
 them; that the other were to have this power, without either the
 inclination or the interest.
     This people, however, by degrees came to put their military
 force on the very footing to which this description alludes.
 Marius made a capital change in the manner of levying soldiers at
 Rome: He filled his legions with the mean and the indigent, who
 depended on military pay for subsistence; he created a force
 which rested on mere discipline alone, and the skill of the
 gladiator; he taught his troops to employ their swords against
 the constitution of their country, and set the example of a
 practice which was soon adopted and improved by his successors.
     The Romans only meant by their armies to incroach on the
 freedom of other nations, while they preserved their own. They
 forgot, that in assembling soldiers of fortune, and in suffering
 any leader to be master of a disciplined army, they actually
 resigned their political rights, and suffered a master to arise
 for the state. This people, in short, whose ruling passion was
 depredation and conquest, perished by the recoil of an engine
 which they themselves had erected against mankind.
     The boasted refinements, then, of the polished age, are not
 divested of danger. They open a door, perhaps, to disaster, as
 wide and accessible as any of those they have shut. If they build
 walls and ramparts, they enervate the minds of those who are
 placed to defend them; if they form disciplined armies, they
 reduce the military spirit of entire nations; and by placing the
 sword where they have given a distaste to civil establishments,
 they prepare for mankind the government of force.
     It is happy for the nations of Europe, that the disparity
 between the soldier and the pacific citizen can never be so great
 as it became among the Greeks and the Romans. In the use of
 modern arms, the novice is made to learn, and to practise with
 ease, all that the veteran knows; and if to teach him were a
 matter of real difficulty, happy are they who are not deterred by
 such difficulties, and who can discover the arts which tend to
 fortify and preserve, not to enervate and ruin their country.
 
 Section V.
 
 Of National Waste.
 
     The strength of nations consists in the wealth, the numbers,
 and the character, of their people. The history of their progress
 from a state of rudeness, is, for the most part, a detail of the
 struggles they have maintained, and of the arts they have
 practised, to strengthen, or to Secure themselves. Their
 conquests, their population, and their commerce, their civil and
 military arrangements, their skill in the construction of
 weapons, and in the methods of attack and defence; the very
 distribution of tasks, whether in private business or in public
 affairs, either tend to bestow, or promise to employ with
 advantage, the constituents of a national force, and the
 resources of war.
     If we suppose, that together with these advantages, the
 military character of a people remains, or is improved, it must
 follow, that what is gained in civilization, is a real increase
 of strength; and that the ruin of nations could never take its
 rise from themselves. Where states have stopped short in their
 progress, or have actually gone to decay, we may suspect, that
 however disposed to advance, they have found a limit, beyond
 which they could not proceed; or from a remission of the national
 spirit, and a weakness of character, were unable to make the most
 of their resources, and natural advantages. On this supposition,
 from being stationary, they may begin to relapse, and by a
 retrograde motion, in a succession of ages, arrive at a state of
 greater weakness, than that which they quitted in the beginning
 of their progress; and with the appearance of better arts, and
 superior conduct, expose themselves to become a prey to
 barbarians, whom, in the attainment, or the height of their
 glory, they had easily baffled or despised.
     Whatever may be the natural wealth of a people, or whatever
 may be the limits beyond which they cannot improve on their
 stock, it is probable, that no nation has ever reached those
 limits, or has been able to postpone its misfortunes, and the
 effects of misconduct, until its fund of materials, and the
 fertility of its soil, were exhausted, or the numbers of its
 people were greatly reduced. The same errors in policy, and
 weakness of manners, which prevent the proper use of resources,
 likewise check their increase, or improvement.
     The wealth of the state consists in the fortune of its
 members. The actual revenue of the state is that share of every
 private fortune, which the public has been accustomed to demand
 for national purposes. This revenue cannot be always proportioned
 to what may be supposed redundant in the private estate, but to
 what is, in some measure, thought so by the owner; and to what he
 may be made to spare, without intrenching on his manner of
 living, and without suspending his projects of expence, or of
 commerce. It should appear, therefore, that any immoderate
 increase of private expence is a prelude to national weakness:
 government, even while each of its subjects consumes a princely
 estate, may be straitened in point of revenue, and the paradox be
 explained by example, That the public is poor, while its members
 are rich.
     We are frequently led into error by mistaking money for
 riches; we think that a people cannot be impoverished by a waste
 of money which is spent among themselves. The fact is, that men
 are impoverished, only in two ways; either by having their gains
 suspended, or by having their substance consumed; and money
 expended at home, being circulated, and not consumed, cannot, any
 more than the exchange of a tally, or a counter, among a certain
 number of hands, tend to diminish the wealth of the company among
 whom it is handed about. But while money circulates at home, the
 necessaries of life, which are the real constituents of wealth,
 may be idly consumed; the industry which might be employed to
 increase the stock of a people, may be suspended, or turned to
 abuse.
     Great armies, maintained either at home or abroad, without
 any national object, are so many mouths unnecessarily opened to
 waste the stores of the public, and so many hands with-held from
 the arts by which its profits are made. Unsuccessful enterprises
 are so many ventures thrown away, and losses sustained,
 proportioned to the capital employed in the service. The
 Helvetii, in order to invade the Roman province of Gaul, burnt
 their habitations, dropt their instruments of husbandry, and
 consumed, in one year, the savings of many. The enterprise failed
 of success, and the nation was undone.
     States have endeavoured, in some instances, by pawning their
 credit, instead of employing their capital, to disguise the
 hazards they ran. They have found, in the loans they raised, a
 casual resource, which encouraged their enterprises. They have
 seemed, by their manner of erecting transferable funds, to leave
 the capital for purposes of trade, in the hands of the subject,
 while it is actually expended by the government. They have, by
 these means, proceeded to the execution of great national
 projects, without suspending private industry, and have left
 future ages to answer, in part, for debts contracted with a view
 to future emolument. So far the expedient is plausible, and
 appears to be just. The growing burden too, is thus gradually
 laid; and if a nation be to sink in some future age, every
 minister hopes it may still keep afloat in his own. But the
 measure, for this very reason, is, with all its advantages,
 extremely dangerous, in the hands of a precipitant and ambitious
 administration, regarding only the present occasion, and
 imagining a state to be inexhaustible, while a capital can be
 borrowed, and the interest be paid.
     We are told of a nation, who, during a certain period,
 rivalled the glories of the ancient world, threw off the dominion
 of a master armed against them with the powers of a great
 kingdom, broke the yoke with which they had been oppressed, and
 almost within the course of a century, raised, by their industry
 and national vigour, a new and formidable power, which struck the
 former potentates of Europe with awe and suspense, and turned the
 badges of poverty with which they set out, into the ensigns of
 war and dominion. This end was attained by the great efforts of a
 spirit awaked by oppression, by a successful pursuit of national
 wealth, and by a rapid anticipation of future revenue. But this
 illustrious state is supposed, not only in the language of a
 former section, to have preoccupied the business; they have
 sequestered the inheritance of many ages to come.
     Great national expence, however, does not imply the necessity
 of any national suffering. While revenue is applied with success,
 to obtain some valuable end; the profits of every adventure,
 being more than sufficient to repay its costs, the public should
 gain, and its resources should continue to multiply. But an
 expence, whether sustained at home or abroad, whether a waste of
 the present, or an anticipation of future, revenue, if it bring
 no proper return, is to be reckoned among the causes of national
 ruin.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. Shralenberg.
 
 2. Gemelli Carceri.
 
 3. Memoirs of Brandenberg.
 
 