



An Essay on the History of Civil Society


 by Adam Ferguson

 1767.
 
 
 Part First.
 
 Of the General Characteristics of Human Nature
 
 
 Section I.
 
 Of the question relating to the State of Nature
 
     Natural productions are generally formed by degrees.
 Vegetables grow from a tender shoot, and animals from an infant
 state. The latter being destined to act, extend their operations
 as their powers increase: they exhibit a progress, in what they
 perform, as well as in the faculties they acquire. This progress
 in the case of man is continued to a greater extent than in that
 of any other animal. Not only the individual advances from
 infancy to manhood, but the species itself from rudeness to
 civilization. Hence the supposed departure of mankind from the
 state of their nature; hence our conjectures and different
 opinions of what man must have been in the first age of his
 being. The poet, the historian, and the moralist, frequently
 allude to this ancient time; and under the emblems of gold, or of
 iron, represent a condition, and a manner of life, from which
 mankind have either degenerated, or on which they have greatly
 improved. On either supposition, the first state of our nature
 must have borne no resemblance to what men have exhibited in any
 subsequent period; historical monuments, even of the earliest
 date, are to be considered as novelties; and the most common
 establishments of human society are to be classed among the
 incroachments which fraud, oppression, or a busy invention, have
 made upon the reign of nature, by which the chief of our
 grievances or blessings were equally with-held. Among the writers
 who have attempted to distinguish, in the human character, its
 original qualities, and to point out the limits between nature
 and art, some have represented mankind in their first condition,
 as possessed of mere animal sensibility, without any exercise of
 the faculties that render them superior to the brutes, without
 any political union, without any means of explaining their
 sentiments, and even without possessing any of the apprehensions
 and passions which the voice and the gesture are so well fitted
 to express. Others have made the state of nature to consist in
 perpetual wars, kindled by competition for dominion and interest,
 where every individual had a separate quarrel with his kind, and
 where the presence of a fellow-creature was the signal of battle.
     The desire of laying the foundation of a favourite system, or
 a fond expectation, perhaps, that we may be able to penetrate the
 secrets of nature, to the very source of existence, have, on this
 subject, led to many fruitless inquiries, and given rise to many
 wild suppositions. Among the various qualities which mankind
 possess, we select one or a few particulars on which to establish
 a theory, and in framing our account of what man was in some
 imaginary state of nature, we overlook what he has always
 appeared within the reach of our own observation, and in the
 records of history.
     In every other instance, however, the natural historian
 thinks himself obliged to collect facts, not to offer
 conjectures. When he treats of any particular species of animals,
 he supposes, that their present dispositions and instincts are
 the same they originally had, and that their present manner of
 life is a continuance of their first destination. He admits, that
 his knowledge of the material system of the world consists in a
 collection of facts, or at most, in general tenets derived from
 particular observations and experiments. It is only in what
 relates to himself, and in matters the most important, and the
 most easily known, that he substitutes hypothesis instead of
 reality, and confounds the provinces of imagination and reason,
 of poetry and science.
     But without entering any farther on questions either in moral
 or physical subjects, relating to the manner or to the origin of
 our knowledge; without any disparagement to that subtilty which
 would analyze every sentiment, and trace every mode of being to
 its source; it may be safely affirmed, that the character of man,
 as he now exists, that the laws of this animal and intellectual
 system, on which his happiness now depends, deserve our principal
 study; and that general principles relating to this, or any other
 subject, are useful only so far as they are founded on just
 observation, and lead to the knowledge of important consequences,
 or so far as they enable us to act with success when we would
 apply either the intellectual or the physical powers of nature,
 to the great purposes of human life.
     If both the earliest and the latest accounts collected from
 every quarter of the earth, represent mankind as assembled in
 troops and companies; and the individual always joined by
 affection to one party, while he is possibly opposed to another;
 employed in the exercise of recollection and foresight; inclined
 to communicate his own sentiments, and to be made acquainted with
 those of others; these facts must be admitted as the foundation
 of all our reasoning relative to man. His mixed disposition to
 friendship or enmity, his reason, his use of language and
 articulate sounds, like the shape and the erect position of his
 body, are to be considered as so many attributes of his nature:
 they are to be retained in his description, as the wing and the
 paw are in that of the eagle and the lion, and as different
 degrees of fierceness, vigilance, timidity, or speed, are made to
 occupy a place in the natural history of different animals.
     If the question be put, What the mind of man could perform,
 when left to itself, and without the aid of any foreign
 direction? we are to look for our answer in the history of
 mankind. Particular experiments which have been found so useful
 in establishing the principles of other sciences, could probably,
 on this subject, teach us nothing important, or new: we are to
 take the history of every active being from his conduct in the
 situation to which he is formed, not from his appearance in any
 forced or uncommon condition; a wild man therefore, caught in the
 woods, where he had always lived apart from his species, is a
 singular instance, not a specimen of any general character. As
 the anatomy of an eye which had never received the impressions of
 light, or that of an ear which had never felt the impulse of
 sounds, would probably exhibit defects in the very structure of
 the organs themselves, arising from their not being applied to
 their proper functions; so any particular case of this sort would
 only shew in what degree the powers of apprehension and sentiment
 could exist where they had not been employed, and what would be
 the defects and imbecilities of a heart in which the emotions
 that pertain to society had never been felt.
     Mankind are to be taken in groupes, as they have always
 subsisted. The history of the individual is but a detail of the
 sentiments and thoughts he has entertained in the view of his
 species: and every experiment relative to this subject should be
 made with entire societies, not with single men. We have every
 reason, however, to believe, that in the case of such an
 experiment made, we shall suppose, with a colony of children
 transplanted from the nursery, and left to form a society apart,
 untaught, and undisciplined, we should only have the same things
 repeated, which, in so many different parts of the earth, have
 been transacted already. The members of our little society would
 feed and sleep, would herd together and play, would have a
 language of their own, would quarrel and divide, would be to one
 another the most important objects of the scene, and, in the
 ardour of their friendships and competitions, would overlook
 their personal danger, and suspend the care of their
 self-preservation. Has not the human race been planted like the
 colony in question? Who has directed their course? whose
 instruction have they heard? or whose example have they followed?
     Nature, therefore, we shall presume, having given to every
 animal its mode of existence, its dispositions and manner of
 life, has dealt equally with those of the human race; and the
 natural historian who would collect the properties of this
 species, may fill up every article now, as well as he could have
 done in any former age. yet one property by which man is
 distinguished, has been sometimes overlooked in the account of
 his nature, or has only served to mislead our attention. In other
 classes of animals, the individual advances from infancy to age
 or maturity; and he attains, in the compass of a single life, to
 all the perfection his nature can reach: but, in the human kind,
 the species has a progress as well as the individual; they build
 in every subsequent age on foundations formerly laid; and, in a
 succession of years, tend to a perfection in the application of
 their faculties, to which the aid of long experience is required,
 and to which many generations must have combined their
 endeavours. We observe the progress they have made; we distinctly
 enumerate many of its steps; we can trace them back to a distant
 antiquity of which no record remains, nor any monument is
 preserved, to inform us what were the openings of this wonderful
 scene. The consequence is, that instead of attending to the
 character of our species, where the particulars are vouched by
 the surest authority, we endeavour to trace it through ages and
 scenes unknown; and, instead of supposing that the beginning of
 our story was nearly of a piece with the sequel, we think
 ourselves warranted to reject every circumstance of our present
 condition and frame, as adventitious, and foreign to our nature.
 The progress of mankind from a supposed state of animal
 sensibility, to the attainment of reason, to the use of language,
 and to the habit of society, has been accordingly painted with a
 force of imagination, and its steps have been marked with a
 boldness of invention, that would tempt us to admit, among the
 materials of history, the suggestions of fancy, and to receive,
 perhaps, as the model of our nature in its original state, some
 of the animals whose shape has the greatest resemblance to
 ours.(1*)
     It would be ridiculous to affirm, as a discovery, that the
 species of the horse was probably never the same with that of the
 lion; yet, in opposition to what has dropped from the pens of
 eminent writers, we are obliged to observe, that men have always
 appeared among animals a distinct and a superior race; that
 neither the possession of similar organs, nor the approximation
 of shape, nor the use of the hand,(2*) nor the continued
 intercourse with this sovereign artist, has enabled any other
 species to blend their nature or their inventions with his; that
 in his rudest state, he is found to be above them; and in his
 greatest degeneracy, never descends to their level. He is, in
 short, a man in every condition; and we can learn nothing of his
 nature from the analogy of other animals. If we would know him,
 we must attend to himself, to the course of his life, and the
 tenor of his conduct. With him the society appears to be as old
 as the individual, and the use of the tongue as universal as that
 of the hand or the foot. If there was a time in which he had his
 acquaintance with his own species to make, and his faculties to
 acquire, it is a time of which we have no record, and in relation
 to which our opinions can serve no purpose, and are supported by
 no evidence.
     We are often tempted into these boundless regions of
 ignorance or conjecture, by a fancy which delights in creating
 rather than in merely retaining the forms which are presented
 before it: we are the dupes of a subtilty, which promises to
 supply every defect of our knowledge, and, by filling up a few
 blanks in the story of nature, pretends to conduct our
 apprehension nearer to the source of existence. On the credit of
 a few observations, we are apt to presume, that the secret may
 soon be laid open, and that what is termed wisdom in nature, may
 be referred to the operation of physical powers. We forget that
 physical powers, employed in succession, and combined to a
 salutary purpose, constitute those very proofs of design from
 which we infer the existence of God; and that this truth being
 once admitted, we are no longer to search for the source of
 existence; we can only collect the laws which the author of
 nature has established; and in our latest as well as our earliest
 discoveries, only come to perceive a mode of creation or
 providence before unknown.
     We speak of art as distinguished from nature; but art itself
 is natural to man. He is in some measure the artificer of his own
 frame, as well as his fortune, and is destined, from the first
 age of his being, to invent and contrive. He applies the same
 talents to a variety of purposes, and acts nearly the same part
 in very different scenes. He would be always improving on his
 subject, and he carries this intention where-ever he moves,
 through the streets of the populous city, or the wilds of the
 forest. While he appears equally fitted to every condition, he is
 upon this account unable to settle in any. At once obstinate and
 fickle, he complains of innovations, and is never sated with
 novelty. He is perpetually busied in reformations, and is
 continually wedded to his errors. If he dwell in a cave, he would
 improve it into a cottage; if he has already built, he would
 still build to a greater extent. But he does not propose to make
 rapid and hasty transitions; his steps are progressive and slow;
 and his force, like the power of a spring, silently presses on
 every resistance; an effect is sometimes produced before the
 cause is perceived; and with all his talent for projects, his
 work is often accomplished before the plan is devised. It
 appears, perhaps, equally difficult to retard or to quicken his
 pace; if the projector complain he is tardy, the moralist thinks
 him unstable. and whether his motions be rapid or slow, the
 scenes of human affairs perpetually change in his management: his
 emblem is a passing stream, not a stagnating pool. We may desire
 to direct his love of improvement to its proper object, we may
 wish for stability of conduct; but we mistake human nature, if we
 wish for a termination of labour, or a scene of repose.
     The occupations of men, in every condition, bespeak their
 freedom of choice, their various opinions, and the multiplicity
 of wants by which they are urged: but they enjoy, or endure, with
 a sensibility, or a phlegm, which are nearly the same in every
 situation. They possess the shores of the Caspian, or the
 Atlantic, by a different tenure, but with equal ease. On the one
 they are fixed to the soil, and seem to be formed for settlement,
 and the accommodation of cities: The names they bestow on a
 nation, and on its territory, are the same. On the other they are
 mere animals of passage, prepared to roam on the face of the
 earth, and with their herds, in search of new pasture and
 favourable seasons, to follow the sun in his annual course.
     Man finds his lodgment alike in the cave, the cottage, and
 the palace; and his subsistence equally in the woods, in the
 dairy, or the farm. He assumes the distinction of titles,
 equipage, and dress; he devises regular systems of government,
 and a complicated body of laws: or, naked in the woods, has no
 badge of superiority but the strength of his limbs and the
 sagacity of his mind; no rule of conduct but choice; no tie with
 his fellow-creatures but affection, the love of company, and the
 desire of safety. Capable of a great variety of arts, yet
 dependent on none in particular for the preservation of his
 being; to whatever length he has carried his artifice, there he
 seems to enjoy the conveniencies that suit his nature, and to
 have found the condition to which he is destined. The tree which
 an American, on the banks of the Oroonoko,(3*) has chosen to
 climb for the retreat, and the lodgement of his family, is to him
 a convenient dwelling. The sopha, the vaulted dome, and the
 colonade, do not more effectually content their native
 inhabitant.
     If we are asked therefore, Where the state of nature is to be
 found? we may answer, It is here; and it matters not whether we
 are understood to speak in the island of Great Britain, at the
 Cape of Good Hope, or the Straits of Magellan. While this active
 being is in the train of employing his talents, and of operating
 on the subjects around him, all situations are equally natural.
 If we are told, That vice, at least, is contrary to nature; we
 may answer, It is worse; it is folly and wretchedness. But if
 nature is only opposed to art, in what situation of the human
 race are the footsteps of art unknown? In the condition of the
 savage, as well as in that of the citizen, are many proofs of
 human invention; and in either is not any permanent station, but
 a mere stage through which this travelling being is destined to
 pass. If the palace be unnatural, the cottage is so no less; and
 the highest refinements of political and moral apprehension, are
 not more artificial in their kind, than the first operations of
 sentiment and reason.
     If we admit that man is susceptible of improvement, and has
 in himself a principle of progression, and a desire of
 perfection, it appears improper to say, that he has quitted the
 state of his nature, when he has begun to proceed; or that he
 finds a station for which he was not intended, while, like other
 animals, he only follows the disposition, and employs the powers
 that nature has given.
     The latest efforts of human invention are but a continuation
 of certain devices which were practised in the earliest ages of
 the world, and in the rudest state of mankind. What the savage
 projects, or observes, in the forest, are the steps which led
 nations, more advanced, from the architecture of the cottage to
 that of the palace, and conducted the human mind from the
 perceptions of sense, to the general conclusions of science.
     Acknowledged defects are to man in every condition matter of
 dislike. Ignorance and imbecility are objects of contempt:
 penetration and conduct give eminence, and procure esteem.
 Whither should his feelings and apprehensions on these subjects
 lead him? To a progress, no doubt, in which the savage, as well
 as the philosopher, is engaged; in which they have made different
 advances, but in which their ends are the same. The admiration
 Cicero entertained for literature, eloquence, and civil
 accomplishments, was not more real than that of a Scythian for
 such a measure of similar endowments as his own apprehension
 could reach. 'Were I to boast,' says a Tartar prince,(4*) 'it
 would be of that wisdom I have received from God. For as, on the
 one hand, I yield to none in the conduct of war, in the
 disposition of armies, whether of horse or of foot, and in
 directing the movements of great or small bodies; so, on the
 other, I have my talent in writing, inferior perhaps only to
 those who inhabit the great cities of Persia or India. Of other
 nations, unknown to me, I do not speak.'
     Man may mistake the objects of his pursuit; he may misapply
 his industry, and misplace his improvements. If under a sense of
 such possible errors, he would find a standard by which to judge
 of his own proceedings, and arrive at the best state of his
 nature, he cannot find it perhaps in the practice of any
 individual, or of any nation whatever; not even in the sense of
 the majority, or the prevailing opinion of his kind. He must look
 for it in the best conceptions of his understanding, in the best
 movements of his heart; he must thence discover what is the
 perfection and the happiness of which he is capable. He will
 find, on the scrutiny, that the proper state of his nature, taken
 in this sense, is not a condition from which mankind are for ever
 removed, but one to which they may now attain; not prior to the
 exercise of their faculties, but procured by their just
 application.
     Of all the terms that we employ in treating of human affairs,
 those of natural and unnatural are the least determinate in their
 meaning. Opposed to affectation, frowardness, or any other defect
 of the temper of character, the natural is an epithet of praise;
 but employed to specify a conduct which proceeds from the nature
 of man, can serve to distinguish nothing: for all the actions of
 men are equally the result of their nature. At most, this
 language can only refer to the general and prevailing sense or
 practice of mankind; and the purpose of every important inquiry
 on this subject may be served by the use of a language equally
 familiar and more precise. What is just, or unjust? What is
 happy, or wretched, in the manners of men? What, in their various
 situations, is favourable or adverse to their amiable qualities?
 are questions to which we may expect a satisfactory answer: and
 whatever may have been the original state of our species, it is
 of more importance to know the condition to which we ourselves
 should aspire, than that which our ancestors may be supposed to
 have left.
 
 Section II.
 
 Of the Principles of Self-preservation
 
     If in human nature there are qualities by which it is
 distinguished from every other part of the animal creation, men
 are themselves in different climates and in different ages
 greatly diversified. So far as we are able to account for this
 diversity on principles tither moral or physical, we perform a
 task of great curiosity or signal utility. It appears necessary,
 however, that we attend to the universal qualities of our nature,
 before we regard its varieties, or attempt to explain differences
 consisting in the unequal possession or application of
 dispositions and powers that are in some measure common to all
 mankind.
     Man, like the other animals, has certain instinctive
 propensities, which, prior to the perception of pleasure or pain,
 and prior to the experience of what is pernicious or useful, lead
 him to perform many functions of nature relative to himself and
 to his fellow-creatures. He has one set of dispositions which
 refer to his animal preservation, and to the continuance of his
 race; another which lead to society, and by inlisting him on the
 side of one tribe or community, frequently engage him in war and
 contention with the rest of mankind. His powers of discernment,
 or his intellectual faculties, which, under the appellation of
 reason, are distinguished from the analogous endowments of other
 animals, refer to the objects around him, either as they are
 subjects of mere knowledge, or as they are subjects of
 approbation or censure. He is formed not only to know, but
 likewise to admire and to contemn; and these proceedings of his
 mind have a principal reference to his own character, and to that
 of his fellow-creatures, as being the subjects on which he is
 chiefly concerned to distinguish what is right from what is
 wrong. He enjoys his felicity likewise on certain fixed and
 determinate conditions; and either as an individual apart, or as
 a member of civil society, must take a particular course in order
 to reap the advantages of his nature. He is, withal, in a very
 high degree susceptible of habits; and can, by forbearance or
 exercise, so far weaken, confirm, or even diversify his talents,
 and his dispositions, as to appear, in a great measure, the
 arbiter of his own rank in nature, and the author of all the
 varieties which are exhibited in the actual history of his
 species. The universal characteristics, in the mean time, to
 which we have now referred, must, when we would treat of any part
 of this history, constitute the first subject of our attention;
 and they require not only to be enumerated, but to be distinctly
 considered.
     The dispositions which refer to the preservation of the
 individual, while they continue to operate in the manner of
 instinctive desires, are nearly the same in man that they are in
 the other animals: but in him they are sooner or later combined
 with reflection and foresight; they give rise to his
 apprehensions on the subject of property, and make him acquainted
 with that object of care which he calls his interest. Without the
 instincts which teach the beaver and the squirrel, the ant and
 the bee, to make up their little hoards for winter, at first
 improvident, and, where no immediate object of passion is near,
 addicted to sloth, he becomes, in process of time, the great
 storemaster among animals. He finds in a provision of wealth,
 which he is probably never to employ, an object of his greatest
 solicitude, and the principal idol of his mind. He apprehends a
 relation between his person and his property, which renders what
 he calls his own in a manner a part of himself, a constituent of
 his rank, his condition, and his character, in which, independent
 of any real enjoyment he may be fortunate or unhappy; and,
 independent of any personal merit, he may be an object of
 consideration or neglect; and in which he may be wounded and
 injured, while his person is safe, and every want of his nature
 completely supplied.
     In these apprehensions, while other passions only operate
 occasionally, the interested find the object of their ordinary
 cares; their motive to the practice of mechanic and commercial
 arts; their temptation to trespass on the laws of justice; and,
 when extremely corrupted, the price of their prostitutions, and
 the standard of their opinions on the subject of good and of
 evil. Under this influence, they would enter, if not restrained
 by the laws of civil society, on a scene of violence or meanness,
 which would exhibit our species, by turns, under an aspect more
 terrible and odious, or more vile and contemptible, than that of
 any animal which inherits the earth.
     Although the consideration of interest is founded on the
 experience of animal wants and desires, its object is not to
 gratify any particular appetite, but to secure the means of
 gratifying all; and it imposes frequently a restraint on the very
 desires from which it arose, more powerful and more severe than
 those of religion or duty. It arises from the principles of
 self-preservation in the human frame; but is a corruption, or at
 least a partial result, of those principles, and is upon many
 accounts very improperly termed self-love.
     Love is an affection which carries the attention of the mind
 beyond itself, and has a quality, which we call tenderness, that
 never can accompany the considerations of interest. This
 affection being a complacency and a continued satisfaction in its
 object, independent of any external event, it has, in the midst
 of disappointment and sorrow, pleasures and triumphs unknown to
 those whO act without any regard to their fellow-creatures; and
 in every change of condition, it continues entirely distinct from
 the sentiments which we feel on the subject of personal success
 or adversity. But as the care a man entertains for his own
 interest, and the attention his affection makes him pay to that
 of another, may have similar effects, the one on his own fortune,
 the other on that of his friend, we confound the principles from
 which he acts; we suppose that they are the same in kind, only
 referred to different objects; and we not only misapply the name
 of love, in conjunction with self, but, in a manner tending to
 degrade our nature, we limit the aim of this supposed selfish
 affection to the securing or accumulating the constituents of
 interest, or the means of mere animal life.
     It is somewhat remarkable, that notwithstanding men value
 themselves so much on qualities of the mind, on parts, learning
 and wit, on courage, generosity, and honour, those men are still
 supposed to be in the highest degree selfish or attentive to
 themselves, who are most careful of animal life, and who are
 least mindful of rendering that life an object worthy of care. It
 will be difficult, however, to tell why a good understanding, a
 resolute and generous mind, should not, by every man in his
 senses, be reckoned as much parts of himself, as either his
 stomach or his palate, and much more than his estate or his
 dress. The epicure, who consults his physician, how he may
 restore his relish for food, and by creating an appetite, may
 increase the means of enjoyment, might at least with an equal
 regard to himself, consult how he might strengthen his affection
 to a parent or a child, to his country or to mankind; and it is
 probable that an appetite of this sort would prove a source of
 enjoyment not less than the former.
     By our supposed selfish maxims, notwithstanding, we generally
 exclude from among the objects of our personal cares, many of the
 happier and more respectable qualities of human nature. We
 consider affection and courage as mere follies, that lead us to
 neglect or expose ourselves; we make wisdom consist in a regard
 to our interest; and without explaining what interest means, we
 would have it understood as the only reasonable motive of action
 with mankind. There is even a system of philosophy founded upon
 tenets of this sort, and such is our opinion of what men are
 likely to do upon selfish principles, that we think it must have
 a tendency very dangerous to virtue. But the errors of this
 system do not consist so much in general principles, as in their
 particular applications; not so much in teaching men to regard
 themselves, as in leading them to forget that their happiest
 affections, their candour, and their independence of mind, are in
 reality parts of themselves. And the adversaries of this supposed
 selfish philosophy, where it makes self-love the ruling passion
 with mankind, have had reason to find fault, not so much with its
 general representations of human nature, as with the obtrusion of
 a mere innovation in language for a discovery in science.
     When the vulgar speak of their different motives, they are
 satisfied with ordinary names, which refer to known and obvious
 distinctions. Of this kind are the terms benevolence and
 selfishness, by which they express their desire of the welfare of
 others, or the care of their own. The speculative are not always
 satisfied with this proceeding; they would analyze, as well as
 enumerate the principles of nature; and the chance is, that,
 merely to gain the appearance of something new, without any
 prospect of real advantage, they will disturb the order of vulgar
 apprehension. In the case before us, they have actually found,
 that benevolence is no more than a species of self-love; and
 would oblige us, if possible, to look out for a new set of words,
 by which we may distinguish the selfishness of the parent when he
 takes care of his child, from his selfishness when he only takes
 care of himself. For according to this philosophy, as in both
 cases he only means to gratify a desire of his own, he is in both
 cases equally selfish. The term benevolent, in the mean time, is
 not employed to characterise persons who have no desires of their
 own, but persons whose own desires prompt them to procure the
 welfare of others. The fact is, that we should need only a fresh
 supply of language, instead of that which by this seeming
 discovery we should have lost, in order to make the reasonings of
 men proceed as they formerly did. But it is certainly impossible
 to live and to act with men, without employing different names to
 distinguish the humane from the cruel, and the benevolent from
 the selfish.
     These terms have their equivalents in every tongue; they were
 invented by men of no refinement, who only meant to express what
 they distinctly perceived or strongly felt. And if a man of
 speculation should prove that we are selfish in a sense of his
 own, it does not follow that we are so in the sense of the
 vulgar; or, as ordinary men would understand his conclusion, that
 we are condemned in every instance to act on motives of interest,
 covetousness, pusillanimity, and cowardice; for such is conceived
 to be the ordinary import of selfishness in the character of man.
     An affection or passion of any kind is sometimes said to give
 us an interest in its object; and humanity itself gives an
 interest in the welfare of mankind. This term interest, which
 commonly implies little more than our regard to property, is
 sometimes put for utility in general, and this for happiness;
 insomuch that, under these ambiguities, it is not surprising we
 are still unable to determine, whether interest is the only
 motive of human action, and the standard by which to distinguish
 our good from our ill.
     So much is said in this place, not from any desire to have a
 share in any controversy of this sort, but merely to confine the
 meaning of the term interest to its most common acceptation, and
 to intimate our intention of employing it in expressing those
 objects of care which refer to our external condition, and the
 preservation of our animal nature. When taken in this sense, it
 will not surely be thought to comprehend at once all the motives
 of human conduct. If men be not allowed to have disinterested
 benevolence, they will not be denied to have disinterested
 passions of another kind. Hatred, indignation, and rage,
 frequently urge them to act in opposition to their known
 interest, and even to hazard their lives, without any hopes of
 compensation in any future returns of preferment or profit.
 
 Section III
 
 Of the principles of Union among Mankind
 
     Mankind have always wandered or settled, agreed or
 quarrelled, in troops and companies. The cause of their
 assembling, whatever it be, is the principle of their alliance or
 union.
     In collecting the materials of history, we are seldom willing
 to put up with our subject merely as we find it. We are loth to
 be embarrassed with a multiplicity of particulars, and apparent
 inconsistencies. In theory we profess the investigation of
 general principles; and in order to bring the matter of our
 inquiries within the reach of our comprehension, are disposed to
 adopt any system, Thus, in treating of human affairs, we would
 draw every consequence from a principle of union, or a principle
 of dissension. The state of nature is a state of war or of amity,
 and men are made to unite from a principle of affection, or from
 a principle of fear, as is most suitable to the system of
 different writers. The history of our species indeed abundantly
 shews, that they are to one another mutual objects both of fear
 and of love; and they who prove them to have been originally
 either in a state of alliance, or of war, have arguments in store
 to maintain their assertions. Our attachment to one division, or
 to one sect, seems often to derive much of its force from an
 animosity conceived to an opposite one: and this animosity in its
 turn, as often arises from a zeal in behalf of the side we
 espouse, and from a desire to vindicate the rights of our party.
     'Man is born in society,' says Montesquieu, 'and there he
 remains.' The charms that detain him are known to be manifold. We
 may reckon the parental affection, which, instead of deserting
 the adult, as among the brutes, embraces more close, as it
 becomes mixed with esteem, and the memory of its early effects;
 together with a propensity common to man and other animals, to
 mix with the herd, and, without reflection, to follow the croud
 of his species. What this propensity was in the first moment of
 its operation, we know not; but with men accustomed to company,
 its enjoyments and disappointments are reckoned among the
 principal pleasures or pains of human life. Sadness and
 melancholy are connected with solitude; gladness and pleasure
 with the concourse of men. The track of a Laplander on the snowy
 shore, gives joy to the lonely mariner; and the mute signs of
 cordiality and kindness which are made to him, awaken the memory
 of pleasures which he felt in society. In fine, says the writer
 of a voyage to the north, after describing a mute scene of this
 sort, 'We were extremely pleased to converse with men, since in
 thirteen months we had seen no human creature.'(5*) But we need
 no remote observation to confirm this position: The wailings of
 the infant, and the languors of the adult, when alone; the lively
 joys of the one, and the chearfulness of the other, upon the
 return of company, are a sufficient proof of its solid
 foundations in the frame of our nature.
     In accounting for actions we often forget that we ourselves
 have acted; and instead of the sentiments which stimulate the
 mind in the presence of its object, we assign as the motives of
 conduct with men, those considerations which occur in the hours
 of retirement and cold reflection. In this mood frequently we can
 find nothing important, besides the deliberate prospects of
 interest; and a great work, like that of forming society, must in
 our apprehension arise from deep reflections, and be carried on
 with a view to the advantages which mankind derive from commerce
 and mutual support. But neither a propensity to mix with the
 herd, nor the sense of advantages enjoyed in that condition,
 comprehend all the principles by which men are united together.
 Those bands are even of a feeble texture, when compared to the
 resolute ardour with which a man adheres to his friend, or to his
 tribe, after they have for some time run the career of fortune
 together. Mutual discoveries of generosity, joint trials of
 fortitude, redouble the ardours of friendship, and kindle a flame
 in the human breast, which the considerations of personal
 interest or safety cannot suppress. The most lively transports of
 joy are seen, and the loudest shrieks of despair are heard, when
 the objects of a tender affection are beheld in a state of
 triumph or of suffering. An Indian recovered his friend
 unexpectedly on the island of Juan Fernandes: He prostrated
 himself on the ground, at his feet: 'We stood gazing in silence,'
 says Dampier, 'at this tender scene.' If we would know what is
 the religion of a wild American, what it is in his heart that
 most resembles devotion: it is not his fear of the sorcerer, nor
 his hope of protection from the spirits of the air or the wood;
 it is the ardent affection with which he selects and embraces his
 friend; with which he clings to his side in every season of
 peril; and with which he invokes his spirit from a distance, when
 dangers surprise him alone.(6*) Whatever proofs we may have of
 the social disposition of man in familiar and contiguous scenes,
 it is possibly of importance, to draw our observations from the
 examples of men who live in the simplest condition, and who have
 not learned to affect what they do not actually feel.
     Mere acquaintance and habitude nourish affection, and the
 experience of society brings every passion of the human mind upon
 its side. Its triumphs and prosperities, its calamities and
 distresses, bring a variety and a force of emotion, which can
 only have place in the company of our fellow-creatures. It is
 here that a man is made to forget his weakness, his cares of
 safety, and his subsistence; and to act from those passions which
 make him discover his force. It is here he finds that his arrows
 fly swifter than the eagle, and his weapons wound deeper than the
 paw of the lion, or the tooth of the boar. It is not alone his
 sense of a support which is near, nor the love of distinction in
 the opinion of his tribe, that inspire his courage, or swell his
 heart with a confidence that exceeds what his natural force
 should bestow. Vehement passions of animosity or attachment are
 the first exertions of vigour in his breast; under their
 influence, every consideration, but that of his object, is
 forgotten; dangers and difficulties only excite him the more.
     That condition is surely favourable to the nature of any
 being, in which his force is increased; and if courage be the
 gift of society to man, we have reason to consider his union with
 his species as the noblest part of his fortune. From this source
 are derived, not only the force, but the very existence of his
 happiest emotions; not only the better part, but almost the whole
 of his rational character. Send him to the desert alone, he is a
 plant torn from its roots: the form indeed may remain, but every
 faculty droops and withers; the human personage and the human
 character cease to exist.
     Men are so far from valuing society on account of its mere
 external conveniencies, that they are commonly most attached
 where those conveniencies are least frequent; and are there most
 faithful, where the tribute of their allegiance is paid in blood.
 Affection operates with the greatest force, where it meets with
 the greatest difficulties: In the breast of the parent, it is
 most solicitous amidst the dangers and distresses of the child:
 In the breast of a man, its flame redoubles where the wrongs or
 sufferings of his friend, or his country, require his aid. It is,
 in short, from this principle alone that we can account for the
 obstinate attachment of a savage to his unsettled and defenceless
 tribe, when temptations on the side of ease and of safety might
 induce him to fly from famine and danger, to a station more
 affluent, and more secure. Hence the sanguine affection which
 every Greek bore to his country, and hence the devoted patriotism
 of an early Roman. Let those examples be compared with the spirit
 which reigns in a commercial state, where men may be supposed to
 have experienced, in its full extent, the interest which
 individuals have in the preservation of their country. It is here
 indeed, if ever, that man is sometimes found a detached and a
 solitary being: he has found an object which sets him in
 competition with his fellow-creatures, and he deals with them as
 he does with his cattle and his soil, for the sake of the profits
 they bring. The mighty engine which we suppose to have formed
 society, only tends to set its members at variance, or to
 continue their intercourse after the bands of affection are
 broken.
 
 Section IV
 
 Of the principles of War and Dissension
 
     'There are some circumstances in the lot of mankind,' says
 Socrates, 'that shew them to be destined to friendship and amity.
 Those are, their mutual need of one another; their mutual
 compassion; their sense of mutual benefits; and the pleasures
 arising in company. There are other circumstances which prompt
 them to war and dissension; the admiration and the desire which
 they entertain for the same subjects; their opposite pretensions;
 and the provocations which they mutually offer in the course of
 their competitions.'
     When we endeavour to apply the maxims of natural justice to
 the solution of difficult questions, we find that some cases may
 be supposed, and actually happen, where oppositions take place;
 and are lawful, prior to any provocation, or act of injustice;
 that where the safety and preservation of numbers are mutually
 inconsistent, one party may employ his right of defence, before
 the other has begun an attack. And when we join with such
 examples, the instances of mistake, and misunderstanding, to
 which mankind are exposed, we may be satisfied that war does not
 always proceed from an intention to injure; and that even the
 best qualities of men, their candour, as well as their
 resolution, may operate in the midst of their quarrels.
     There is still more to be observed on this subject. Mankind
 not only find in their condition the sources of variance and
 dissension; they appear to have in their minds the seeds of
 animosity, and to embrace the occasions of mutual opposition,
 with alacrity and pleasure. In the most pacific situation there
 are few who have not their enemies, as well as their friends; and
 who are not pleased with opposing the proceedings of one, as much
 as with favouring the designs of another. Small and simple
 tribes, who in their domestic society have the firmest union, are
 in their state of opposition as separate nations, frequently
 animated with the most implacable hatred. Among the citizens of
 Rome, in the early ages of that republic, the name of a
 foreigner, and that of an enemy, were the same. Among the Greeks,
 the name of Barbarian, under which that people comprehended every
 nation that was of a race, and spoke a language, different from
 their own, became a term of indiscriminate contempt and aversion.
 Even where no particular claim to superiority is formed, the
 repugnance to union, the frequent wars, or rather the perpetual
 hostilities, which take place among rude nations and separate
 clans, discover how much our species is disposed to opposition,
 as well as to concert.
     Late discoveries have brought us to the knowledge of almost
 every situation in which mankind are placed. We have found them
 spread over large and extensive continents, where communications
 are open, and where national confederacy might be easily formed.
 We have found them in narrower districts, circumscribed by
 mountains, great rivers, and arms of the sea. They have been
 found in small and remote islands, where the inhabitants might be
 easily assembled, and derive an advantage from their union. But
 in all those situations, alike, they were broke into cantons, and
 affected a distinction of name and community. The titles of
 fellow-citizen and countryman, unopposed to those of alien and
 foreigner, to which they refer, would fall into disuse, and lose
 their meaning. We love individuals on account of personal
 qualities; but we love our country, as it is a party in the
 divisions of mankind; and our zeal for its interest, is a
 predilection in behalf of the side we maintain.
     In the promiscuous concourse of men, it is sufficient that we
 have an opportunity of selecting our company. We turn away from
 those who do not engage us, and we fix our resort where the
 society is more to our mind. We are fond of distinctions; we
 place ourselves in opposition, and quarrel under the
 denominations of faction and party, without any material subject
 of controversy. Aversion, like affection, is fostered by a
 continued direction to its particular object. Separation and
 estrangement, as well as opposition, widen a breach which did not
 owe its beginnings to any offence. And it would seem, that till
 we have reduced mankind to the state of a family, or found some
 external consideration to maintain their connection in greater
 numbers, they will be for ever separated into bands, and form a
 plurality of nations.
     The sense of a common danger, and the assaults of an enemy,
 have been frequently useful to nations, by uniting their members
 more firmly together, and by preventing the secessions and actual
 separations in which their civil discord might otherwise
 terminate. And this motive to union which is offered from abroad,
 may be necessary, not only in the case of large and extensive
 nations, where coalitions are weakened by distance, and the
 distinction of provincial names; but even in the narrow society
 of the smallest states. Rome itself was founded by a small party,
 which took its flight from Alba; her citizens were often in
 danger of separating; and if the villages and cantons of the
 Volsci had been further removed from the scene of their
 dissensions, the Mons Sacer might have received a new colony
 before the mother country was ripe for such a discharge. She
 continued long to feel the quarrels of her nobles and her people;
 and the gates of Janus were frequently opened, to remind her
 inhabitants of the duties they owed to their country.
     If societies, as well as individuals, be charged with the
 care of their own preservation, and if in both we apprehend a
 separation of interest, which may give rise to jealousies and
 competitions, we cannot be surprised to find hostilities arise
 from this source. But were there no angry passions of a different
 sort, the animosities which attend an opposition of interest,
 should bear a proportion to the supposed value of the subject.
 'The Hottentot nations,' says Kolben, 'trespass on one another by
 thefts of cattle and of women; but such injuries are seldom
 committed, except with a view to exasperate their neighbours, and
 bring them to a war.' Such depredations then are not the
 foundation of a war, but the effects of a hostile intention
 already conceived. The nations of North America, who have no
 herds to preserve, nor settlements to defend, are yet engaged in
 almost perpetual wars, for which they can assign no reason, but
 the point of honour, and a desire to continue the struggle their
 fathers maintained. 'They do not regard the spoils of an enemy;
 and the warrior who has seized any booty, easily parts with it to
 the first person who comes in his way.(7*)
     But we need not cross the Atlantic to find proofs of
 animosity, and to observe, in the collision of separate
 societies, the influence of angry passions, that do not arise
 from an opposition of interest. Human nature has no part of its
 character, of which more flagrant examples are given on this side
 of the globe. What is it that stirs in the breasts of ordinary
 men when the enemies of their country are named? Whence are the
 prejudices that subsist between different provinces, cantons, and
 villages, of the same empire and territory? What is it that
 excites one half of the nations of Europe against the other? The
 statesman may explain his conduct on motives of national jealousy
 and caution, but the people have dislikes and antipathies, for
 which they cannot account. Their mutual reproaches of perfidy and
 injustice, like the Hottentot depredations, are but symptoms of
 an animosity, and the language of a hostile disposition, already
 conceived. The charge of cowardice and pusillanimity, qualities
 which the interested and cautious enemy should, of all others,
 like best to find in his rival, is urged with aversion, and made
 the ground of dislike. Hear the peasants on different sides of
 the Alps, and the Pyrenees, the Rhine, or the British channel,
 give vent to their prejudices and national passions; it is among
 them that we find the materials of war and dissension laid
 without the direction of government, and sparks ready to kindle
 into a flame, which the statesman is frequently disposed to
 extinguish. The fire will not always catch where his reasons of
 state would direct, nor stop where the concurrence of interest
 has produced an alliance. 'My Father,' said a Spanish peasant,
 'would rise from his grave, if he could foresee a war with
 France., What interest had he, or the bones of his father, in the
 quarrels of princes?
     These observations seem to arraign our species, and to give
 an unfavourable picture of mankind; and yet the particulars we
 have mentioned are consistent with the most amiable qualities of
 our nature, and often furnish a scene for the exercise of our
 greatest abilities. They are sentiments of generosity and
 self-denial that animate the warrior in defence of his country;
 and they are dispositions most favourable to mankind, that become
 the principles of apparent hostility to men. Every animal is made
 to delight in the exercise of his natural talents and forces: The
 lion and the tyger sport with the paw; the horse delights to
 commit his mane to the wind, and forgets his pasture to try his
 speed in the field; the bull even before his brow is armed, and
 the lamb while yet an emblem of innocence, have a disposition to
 strike with the forehead, and anticipate, in play, the conflicts
 they are doomed to sustain. Man too is disposed to opposition,
 and to employ the forces of his nature against an equal
 antagonist; he loves to bring his reason, his eloquence, his
 courage, even his bodily strength, to the proof. His sports are
 frequently an image of war; sweat and blood are freely expended
 in play;, and fractures or death are often made to terminate the
 pastimes of idleness and festivity. He was not made to live for
 ever, and even his love of amusement has opened a path that leads
 to the grave.
     Without the rivalship of nations, and the practice of war,
 civil society itself could scarcely have found an object, or a
 form. Mankind might have traded without any formal convention,
 but they cannot be safe without a national concert. The necessity
 of a public defence, has given rise to many departments of state,
 and the intellectual talents of men have found their busiest
 scene in wielding their national forces. To overawe, or
 intimidate, or, when we cannot persuade with reason, to resist
 with fortitude, are the occupations which give its most animating
 exercise, and its greatest triumphs, to a vigorous mind; and he
 who has never struggled with his fellow-creatures, is a stranger
 to half the sentiments of mankind.
     The quarrels of individuals, indeed, are frequently the
 operations of unhappy and detestable passions; malice, hatred,
 and rage. If such passions alone possess the breast, the scene of
 dissension becomes an object of horror; but a common opposition
 maintained by numbers, is always allayed by passions of another
 sort. Sentiments of affection and friendship mix with animosity;
 the active and strenuous become the guardians of their society;
 and violence itself is, in their case, an exertion of generosity
 as well as of courage. We applaud, as proceeding from a national
 or party spirit, what we could not endure as the effect of a
 private dislike; and amidst the competitions of rival states,
 think we have found, for the patriot and the warrior, in the
 practice of violence and stratagem, the most illustrious career
 of human virtue. Even personal opposition here does not divide
 our judgement on the merits of men. The rival names of Agesilaus
 and Epaminondas, of Scipio and Hannibal, are repeated with equal
 praise; and war itself, which in one view appears so fatal, in
 another is the exercise of a liberal spirit; and in the very
 effects which we regret, is but one distemper more by which the
 author of nature has appointed our exit from human life.
     These reflections may open our view into the state of
 mankind; but they tend to reconcile us to the conduct of
 Providence, rather than to make us change our own: where, from a
 regard to the welfare of our fellow-creatures, we endeavour to
 pacify their animosities, and unite them by the ties of
 affection. In the pursuit of this amiable intention, we may hope,
 in some instances, to disarm the angry passions of jealousy and
 envy. we may hope to instil into the breasts of private men
 sentiments of candour toward their fellow-creatures, and a
 disposition to humanity and justice. But it is vain to expect
 that we can give to the multitude of a people a sense of union
 among themselves, without admitting hostility to those who oppose
 them. Could we at once, in the case of any nation, extinguish the
 emulation which is excited from abroad, we should probably break
 or weaken the bands of society at home, and close the busiest
 scenes of national occupations and virtues.
 
 Section V
 
 Of Intellectual Powers
 
     Many attempts have been made to analyze the dispositions
 which we have now enumerated; but one purpose of science, perhaps
 the most important, is served, when the existence of a
 disposition is established. We are more concerned in its reality,
 and in its consequences, than we are in its origin, or manner of
 formation.
     The same observation may be applied to the other powers and
 faculties of our nature. Their existence and use are the
 principal objects of our study. Thinking and reasoning, we say,
 are the operations of some faculty; but in what manner the
 faculties of thought or reason remain, when they are not exerted,
 or by what difference in the frame they are unequal in different
 persons, are questions which we cannot resolve. Their operations
 alone discover them: when unapplied, they lie hid even from the
 person to whom they pertain; and their action is so much a part
 of their nature, that the faculty itself, in many cases, is
 scarcely to be distinguished from a habit acquired in its
 frequent exertion.
     Persons who are occupied with different subjects, who act in
 different scenes, generally appear to have different talents, or
 at least to have the same faculties variously formed, and suited
 to different purposes. The peculiar genius of nations, as well as
 of individuals, may in this manner arise from the state of their
 fortunes. And it is proper that we endeavour to find some rule,
 by which to judge of what is admirable in the capacities of men,
 or fortunate in the application of their faculties, before we
 venture to pass a judgment on this branch of their merits, or
 pretend to measure the degree of respect they may claim by their
 different attainments.
     To receive the informations of sense, is perhaps the earliest
 function of an animal combined with an intellectual nature; and
 one great accomplishment of the living agent consists in the
 force and sensibility of his animal organs. The pleasures or
 pains to which he is exposed from this quarter, constitute to him
 an important difference between the objects which are thus
 brought to his knowledge; and it concerns him to distinguish
 well, before he commits himself to the direction of appetite. He
 must scrutinize the objects of one sense by the perceptions of
 another; examine with the eye, before he ventures to touch; and
 employ every means of observation, before he gratifies the
 appetites of thirst and of hunger. A discernment acquired by
 experience, becomes a faculty of his mind; and the inferences of
 thought are sometimes not to be distinguished from the
 perceptions of sense.
     The objects around us, beside their separate appearances,
 have their relations to one another. They suggest, when compared,
 what would not occur when they are considered apart; they have
 their effects, and mutual influences; they exhibit, in like
 circumstances, similar operations, and uniform consequences. When
 we have found and expressed the points in which the uniformity of
 their operations consists, we have ascertained a physical law.
 Many such laws, and even the most important, are known to the
 vulgar, and occur upon the smallest degrees of reJection: but
 others are hid under a seeming confusion, which ordinary talents
 cannot remove; and are therefore the objects of study, long
 observation, and superior capacity. The faculties of penetration
 and judgement, are, by men of business, as well as of science,
 employed to unravel intricacies of this sort; and the degree of
 sagacity with which either is endowed, is to be measured by the
 success with which they are able to find general rules,
 applicable to a variety of cases that seemed to have nothing in
 common, and to discover important distinctions between subjects
 which the vulgar are apt to confound.
     To collect a multiplicity of particulars under general heads,
 and to refer a variety of operations to their common principle,
 is the object of science. To do the same thing, at least within
 the range of his active engagements, pertains to the man of
 pleasure, or business: and it would seem, that the studious and
 the active are so far employed in the same task, from observation
 and experience, to find the general views under which their
 objects may be considered, and the rules which may be usefully
 applied in the detail of their conduct. They do not always apply
 their talents to different subjects; and they seem to be
 distinguished chiefly by the unequal reach and variety of their
 remarks, or by the intentions which they severally have in
 collecting them.
     Whilst men continue to act from appetites and passions,
 leading to the attainment of external ends, they seldom quit the
 view of their objects in detail, to go far in the road of general
 inquiries. They measure the extent of their own abilities, by the
 promptitude with which they apprehend what is important in every
 subject, and the facility with which they extricate themselves on
 every trying occasion. And these, it must be confessed, to a
 being who is destined to act in the midst of difficulties, are
 the proper test of capacity and force. The parade of words, and
 general reasonings, which sometimes carry an appearance of so
 much learning and knowledge, are of little avail in the conduct
 of life. The talents from which they proceed, terminate in mere
 ostentation, and are seldom connected with that superior
 discernment, with which the active apply in times of perplexity;
 much less that intrepidity and force of mind which are required
 in passing through difficult scenes.
     The abilities of active men, however, have a variety
 corresponding to that of the subjects on which they are occupied.
 A sagacity applied to external and inanimate nature, forms one
 species of capacity; that which is turned to society and human
 affairs, another. Reputation for parts in any scene is equivocal,
 till we know by what kind of exertion that reputation is gained.
 That they understand well the subjects to which they apply, is
 all that can be said, in commending men of the greatest
 abilities: and every department, every profession, would have its
 great men, if there were not a choice of objects for the
 understanding, and of talents for the mind, as well as of
 sentiments for the heart, and of habits for the active character.
     The meanest professions, indeed, so far sometimes forget
 themselves, or the rest of mankind, as to arrogate, in commending
 what is distinguished in their own way, every epithet the most
 respectable claim as the right of superior abilities. Every
 mechanic is a great man with the learner, and the humble admirer,
 in his particular calling; and we can, perhaps, with more
 assurance pronounce what it is that should make a man happy and
 amiable, than what should make his abilities respected, and his
 genius admired. This, upon a view of the talents themselves, may
 perhaps be impossible. The effect, however, will point out the
 rule and the standard of our judgement. To be admired and
 respected, is to have an ascendant among men. The talents which
 most directly procure that ascendant, are those which operate on
 mankind, penetrate their views, prevent their wishes, or
 frustrate their designs. The superior capacity leads with a
 superior energy, where every individual would go, and shews the
 hesitating and the irresolute a clear passage to the attainment
 of their ends.
     This description does not pertain to any particular craft or
 profession; or perhaps it implies a kind of ability, which the
 separate application of men to particular callings, only tends to
 suppress or to weaken. Where shall we find the talents which are
 fit to act with men in a collective body, if we break that body
 into parts, and confine the observation of each to a separate
 track?
     To act in the view of his fellow-creatures, to produce his
 mind in public, to give it all the exercise of sentiment and
 thought, which pertain to man as a member of society, as a
 friend, or an enemy, seems to be the principal calling and
 occupation of his nature. If he must labour, that he may subsist,
 he can subsist for no better purpose than the good of mankind;
 nor can he have better talents than those which qualify him to
 act with men. Here, indeed, the understanding appears to borrow
 very much from the passions; and there is a felicity of conduct
 in human affairs, in which it is difficult to distinguish the
 promptitude of the head from the ardour and sensibility of the
 heart. Where both are united, they constitute that superiority of
 mind, the frequency of which among men, in particular ages and
 nations, much more than the progress they have made in
 speculation, or in the practice of mechanic and liberal arts,
 should determine the rate of their genius, and assign the palm of
 distinction and honour.
     When nations succeed one another in the career of discoveries
 and inquiries, the last is always the most knowing. Systems of
 science are gradually formed. The globe itself is traversed by
 degrees, and the history of every age, when past, is an accession
 of knowledge to those who succeed. The Romans were more knowing
 than the Greeks; and every scholar of modern Europe is, in this
 sense, more learned than the most accomplished person that ever
 bore either of those celebrated names. But is he on that account
 their superior?
     Men are to be estimated, not from what they know, but from
 what they are able to perform; from their skill in adapting
 materials to the several purposes of life; from their vigour and
 conduct in pursuing the objects of policy, and in finding the
 expedients of war and national defence. Even in literature, they
 are to be estimated from the works of their genius, not from the
 extent of their knowledge. The scene of mere observation was
 extremely limited in a Grecian republic; and the bustle of an
 active life appeared inconsistent with study. but there the human
 mind, notwithstanding, collected its greatest abilities, and
 received its best informations, in the midst of sweat and of
 dust.
     It is peculiar to modern Europe, to rest so much of the human
 character on what may be learned in retirement, and from the
 information of books. A just admiration of ancient literature, an
 opinion that human sentiment, and human reason, without this aid,
 were to have vanished from the societies of men, have led us into
 the shade, where we endeavour to derive from imagination and
 thought, what is in reality matter of experience and sentiment:
 and we endeavour, through the grammar of dead languages, and the
 channel of commentators, to arrive at the beauties of thought and
 elocution, which sprang from the animated spirit of society, and
 were taken from the living impressions of an active life. Our
 attainments are frequently limited to the elements of every
 science, and seldom reach to that enlargement of ability and
 power which useful knowledge should give. Like mathematicians,
 who study the Elements of Euclid, but never think of mensuration,
 we read of societies, but do not propose to act with men: we
 repeat the language of politics, but feel not the spirit of
 nations: we attend to the formalities of a military discipline,
 but know not how to employ numbers of men to obtain any purpose
 by stratagem or force.
     But for what end, it may said, point out a misfortune that
 cannot be remedied? If national affairs called for exertion, the
 genius of men would awake; but in the recess of better
 employment, the time which is bestowed on study, if even attended
 with no other advantage, serves to occupy with innocence the
 hours of leisure, and set bounds to the pursuit of ruinous and
 frivolous amusements. From no better reason than this, we employ
 so many of our early years, under the rod, to acquire what it is
 not expected we should retain beyond the threshold of the school;
 and whilst we carry the same frivolous character in our studies
 that we do in our amusements, the human mind could not suffer
 more from a contempt of letters, than it does from the false
 importance which is given to literature, as a business for life,
 not as a help to our conduct, and the means of forming a
 character that may be happy in itself, and useful to mankind.
     If that time which is passed in relaxing the powers of the
 mind, and in with-holding every object but what tends to weaken
 and to corrupt, were employed in fortifying those powers, and in
 teaching the mind to recognise its objects, and its strength, we
 should not, at the years of maturity, be so much at a loss for
 occupation; nor, in attending the chances of a gaming-table,
 misemploy our talents, or waste the fire which remains in the
 breast. They, at least, who by their stations have a share in the
 government of their country, might believe themselves capable of
 business; and while the state had its armies and councils, might
 find objects enough to amuse, without throwing a personal fortune
 into hazard, merely to cure the yawnings of a listless and
 insignificant life. It is impossible for ever to maintain the
 tone of speculation; it is impossible not sometimes to feel that
 we live among men.
 
 Section VI
 
 Of Moral Sentiment
 
     Upon a slight observation of what passes in human life, we
 should be apt to conclude, that the care of subsistence is the
 principal spring of human actions. This consideration leads to
 the invention and practice of mechanical arts; it serves to
 distinguish amusement from business; and, with many, scarcely
 admits into competition any other subject of pursuit or
 attention. The mighty advantages of property and fortune, when
 stript of the recommendations they derive from vanity, or the
 more serious regards to independence and power, only mean a
 provision that is made for animal enjoyment; and if our
 solicitude on this subject were removed, not only the toils of
 the mechanic, but the studies of the learned, would cease; every
 department of public business would become unnecessary; every
 senate-house would be shut up, and every palace deserted.
     Is man therefore, in respect to his object, to be classed
 with the mere brutes, and only to be distinguished by faculties
 that qualify him to multiply contrivances for the support and
 convenience of animal life, and by the extent of a fancy that
 renders the care of animal preservation to him more burdensome
 than it is to the herd with which he shares in the bounty of
 nature? If this were his case, the joy which attends on success,
 or the griefs which arise from disappointment, would make the sum
 of his passions. The torrent that wasted, or the inundation that
 enriched his possessions, would give him all the emotion with
 which he is seized, on the occasion of a wrong by which his
 fortunes are impaired, or of a benefit by which they are
 preserved and enlarged. His fellow-creatures would be considered
 merely as they affected his interest. Profit or loss would serve
 to mark the event of every transaction; and the epithets useful
 or detrimental would serve to distinguish his mates in society,
 as they do the tree which bears plenty of fruit, from that which
 serves only to cumber the ground, or intercept his view.
     This, however, is not the history of our species. What comes
 from a fellow-creature is received with peculiar attention; and
 every language abounds with terms that express somewhat in the
 transactions of men, different from success and disappointment.
 The bosom kindles in company, while the point of interest in view
 has nothing to in flame; and a matter frivolous in itself,
 becomes important, when it serves to bring to light the
 intentions and characters of men. The foreigner, who believed
 that Othello, on the stage, was enraged for the loss of his
 handkerchief, was not more mistaken, than the reasoner who
 imputes any of the more vehement passions of men to the
 impressions of mere profit or loss.
     Men assemble to deliberate on business; they separate from
 jealousies of interest; but in their several collisions, whether
 as friends or as enemies, a fire is struck out which the regards
 to interest or safety cannot confine. The value of a favour is
 not measured when sentiments of kindness are perceived; and the
 term misfortune has but a feeble meaning, when compared to that
 of insult and wrong.
     As actors or spectators, we are perpetually made to feel the
 difference of human conduct, and from a bare recital of
 transactions which have passed in ages and countries remote from
 our own, are moved with admiration and pity, or transported with
 indignation and rage. Our sensibility on this subject gives their
 charm, in retirement, to the relations of history, and to the
 fictions of poetry; sends forth the tear of compassion, gives to
 the blood its briskest movement, and to the eye its liveliest
 glances of displeasure or joy. It turns human life into an
 interesting spectacle, and perpetually solicits even the indolent
 to mix, as opponents or friends, in the scenes which are acted
 before them. Joined to the powers of deliberation and reason, it
 constitutes the basis of a moral nature; and whilst it dictates
 the terms of praise and of blame, serves to class our
 fellow-creatures by the most admirable and engaging, or the most
 odious and contemptible, denominations.
     It is pleasant to find men, who, in their speculations, deny
 the reality of moral distinctions, forget in detail the general
 positions they maintain, and give loose to ridicule, indignation,
 and scorn, as if any of these sentiments could have place, were
 the actions of men indifferent; and with acrimony pretend to
 detect the fraud by which moral restraints have been imposed, as
 if to censure a fraud were not already to take a part on the side
 of morality.(8*)
     Can we explain the principles upon which mankind adjudge the
 preference of characters, and upon which they indulge such
 vehement emotions of admiration or contempt? If it be admitted
 that we cannot, are the facts less true? or must we suspend the
 movements of the heart until they who are employed in framing
 systems of science have discovered the principle from which those
 movements proceed? If a finger burn, we care not for information
 on the properties of fire: if the heart be torn, or the mind
 overjoyed, we have not leisure for speculations on the subject of
 moral sensibility.
     It is fortunate in this, as in other articles to which
 speculation and theory are applied, that nature proceeds in her
 course, whilst the curious are busied in the search of her
 principles. The peasant, or the child, can reason, and judge, and
 speak his language, with a discernment, a consistency, and a
 regard to analogy, which perplex the logician, the moralist, and
 the grammarian, when they would find the principle upon which the
 proceeding is founded, or when they would bring to general rules,
 what is so familiar, and so well sustained in particular cases.
 The felicity of our conduct is more owing to the talent we
 possess for detail, and to the suggestion of particular
 occasions, than it is to any direction we can find in theory and
 general speculations.
     We must, in the result of every inquiry, encounter with facts
 which we cannot explain; and to bear with this mortification
 would save us frequently a great deal of fruitless trouble.
 Together with the sense of our existence, we must admit many
 circumstances which come to our knowledge at the same time, and
 in the same manner; and which do, in reality, constitute the mode
 of our being. Every peasant will tell us, that a man hath his
 rights; and that to trespass on those rights is injustice. If we
 ask him farther, what he means by the term right? we probably
 force him to substitute a less significant, or less proper term,
 in the place of this; or require him to account for what is an
 original mode of his mind, and a sentiment to which he ultimately
 refers, when he would explain himself upon any particular
 application of his language.
     The rights of individuals may relate to a variety of
 subjects, and be comprehended under different heads. Prior to the
 establishment of property, and the distinction of ranks, men have
 a right to defend their persons, and to act with freedom; they
 have a right to maintain the apprehensions of reason, and the
 feelings of the heart; and they cannot for a moment converse with
 one another, without feeling that the part they maintain may be
 just or unjust. It is not, however, our business here to carry
 the notion of a right into its several applications, but to
 reason on the sentiment of favour with which that notion is
 entertained in the mind.
     If it be true, that men are united by instinct, that they act
 in society from affections of kindness and friendship; if it be
 true, that even prior to acquaintance and habitude, men, as such,
 are commonly to one another objects of attention, and some degree
 of regard; that while their prosperity is beheld with
 indifference, their afflictions are considered with
 commiseration; if calamities be measured by the numbers and the
 qualities of men they involve; and if every suffering of a
 fellow-creature draws a croud of attentive spectators; if even in
 the case of those to whom we do not habitually wish any positive
 good, we are still averse to be the instruments of harm; it
 should seem, that in these various appearances of an amicable
 disposition, the foundations of a moral apprehension are
 sufficiently laid, and the sense of a right which we maintain for
 ourselves, is by a movement of humanity and candour extended to
 our fellow creatures.
     What is it that prompts the tongue when we censure an act of
 cruelty or oppression? What is it that constitutes our restraint
 from offences that tend to distress our fellow-creatures? It is
 probably, in both cases, a particular application of that
 principle, which, in presence of the sorrowful, sends forth the
 tear of compassion; and a combination of all those sentiments,
 which constitute a benevolent disposition; and if not a
 resolution to do good, at least an aversion to be the instrument
 of harm.(9*)
     It may be difficult, however, to enumerate the motives of all
 the censures and commendations which are applied to the actions
 of men. Even while we moralize, every disposition of the human
 mind may have its share in forming the judgement, and in
 prompting the tongue. As jealousy is often the most watchful
 guardian of chastity, so malice is often the quickest to spy the
 failings of our neighbour. Envy, affectation, and vanity, may
 dictate the verdicts we give, and the worst principles of our
 nature may be at the bottom of our pretended zeal for morality;
 but if we only mean to inquire, why they who are well disposed to
 mankind, apprehend, in every instance, certain rights pertaining
 to their fellow-creatures, and why they applaud the consideration
 that is paid to those rights, we cannot perhaps assign a better
 reason, than that the person who applauds, is well disposed to
 the welfare of the parties to whom his applauses refer.
     When we consider, that the reality of any amicable propensity
 in the human mind has been frequently contested; when we
 recollect the prevalence of interested competitions, with their
 attendant passions of jealousy, envy, and malice; it may seem
 strange to alledge, that love and compassion are the most
 powerful principles in the human breast: but they are destined,
 on many occasions, to urge with the most irresistible vehemence;
 and if the desire of self-preservation be more constant, and more
 uniform, these are a more plentiful source of enthusiasm,
 satisfaction, and joy. With a power, not inferior to that of
 resentment and rage, they hurry the mind into every sacrifice of
 interest, and bear it undismayed through every hardship and
 danger.
     The disposition on which friendship is grafted, glows with
 satisfaction in the hours of tranquillity, and is pleasant, not
 only in its triumphs, but even in its sorrows. It throws a grace
 on the external air, and, by its expression on the countenance,
 compensates for the want of beauty, or gives a charm which no
 complexion or features can equal. From this source the scenes of
 human life derive their principal felicity; and their imitations
 in poetry, their principal ornament. Descriptions of nature, even
 representations of a vigorous conduct, and a manly courage, do
 not engage the heart, if they be not mixed with the exhibition of
 generous sentiments, and the pathetic, which is found to arise in
 the struggles, the triumphs, or the misfortunes of a tender
 affection. The death of Polites, in the Aeneid, is not more
 affecting than that of many others who perished in the ruins of
 Troy; but the aged Priam was present when this last of his sons
 was slain; and the agonies of grief and sorrow force the parent
 from his retreat, to fall by the hand that shed the blood of his
 child. The pathetic of Homer consists in exhibiting the force of
 affections, not in exciting mere terror and pity; passions he has
 never perhaps, in any instance, attempted to raise.
     With this tendency to kindle into enthusiasm, with this
 command over the heart, with the pleasure that attends its
 emotions, and with all its effects in meriting confidence, and
 procuring esteem, it is not surprising, that a principle of
 humanity should give the tone to our commendations and our
 censures, and even where it is hindered from directing our
 conduct, should still give to the mind, on reflection, its
 knowledge of what is desirable in the human character. What hast
 thou done with thy brother Abel? was the first expostulation in
 behalf of morality; and if the first answer has been often
 repeated, mankind have notwithstand-standing, in one sense,
 sufficiently acknowledged the charge of their nature. They have
 felt, they have talked, and even acted, as the keepers of their
 fellow-creatures: They have made the indications of candour and
 mutual affection the test of what is meritorious and amiable in
 the characters of men: They have made cruelty and oppression the
 principal objects of their indignation and rage: Even while the
 head is occupied with projects of interest, the heart is often
 seduced into friendship; and while business proceeds on the
 maxims of self-preservation, the careless hour is employed in
 generosity and kindness.
     Hence the rule by which men commonly judge of external
 actions, is taken from the supposed influence of such actions on
 the general good. To abstain from harm, is the great law of
 natural justice; to diffuse happiness is the law of morality; and
 when we censure the conferring a favour on one or a few at the
 expence of many, we refer to public utility, as the great object
 at which the actions of men should be aimed.
     After all, it must be confessed, that if a principle of
 affection to mankind, be the basis of our moral approbation and
 dislike, we sometimes proceed in distributing applause or
 censure, without precisely attending to the degree in which our
 fellow-creatures are hurt or obliged; and that, besides the
 virtues of candour, friendship, generosity, and public spirit,
 which bear an immediate reference to this principle, there are
 others which may seem to derive their commendation from a
 different source. Temperance, prudence, fortitude, are those
 qualities likewise admired from a principle of regard to our
 fellow-creatures? Why not, since they render men happy in
 themselves, and useful to others? He who is qualified to promote
 the welfare of mankind, is neither a sot, a fool, nor a coward.
 Can it be more clearly expressed, that temperance, prudence, and
 fortitude, are necessary to the character we love and admire? I
 know well why I should wish for them, in myself. and why likewise
 I should wish for them in my friend, and in every person who is
 an object of my affection. But to what purpose seek for reasons
 of approbation, where qualities are so necessary to our
 happiness, and so great a part in the perfection of our nature?
 We must cease to esteem ourselves, and to distinguish what is
 excellent, when such qualifications incur our neglect.
     A person of an affectionate mind, possessed of a maxim, That
 he himself, as an individual, is no more than a part of the whole
 that demands his regard, has found, in that principle, a
 sufficient foundation for all the virtues; for a contempt of
 animal pleasures, that would supplant his principal enjoyment;
 for an equal contempt of danger or pain, that come to stop his
 pursuits of public good. 'A vehement and steady affection
 magnifies its object, and lessens every difficulty or danger that
 stands in the way.' 'Ask those who have been in love,' says
 Epictetus, 'they will know that I speak truth.'
     'I have before me,' says another eminent moralist,(10*) 'an
 idea of justice, which, if I could follow in every instance, I
 should think myself the most happy of men'. And it is, perhaps,
 of consequence to their happiness, as well as to their conduct,
 if those can be disjoined, that men should have this idea
 properly formed: It is perhaps but another name for that good of
 mankind, which the virtuous are engaged to promote. If virtue be
 the supreme good, its best and most signal effect is, to
 communicate and diffuse itself.
     To love, and even to hate, on the apprehension of moral
 qualities, to espouse one party from a sense of justice, to
 oppose another with indignation excited by iniquity, are the
 common indications of probity, and the operations of an animated,
 upright, and generous spirit. To guard against unjust
 partialities, and ill-grounded antipathies; to maintain that
 composure of mind, which, without impairing its sensibility or
 ardour, proceeds in every instance with discernment and
 penetration, are the marks of a vigorous and cultivated spirit.
 To be able to follow the dictates of such a spirit through all
 the varieties of human life, and with a mind always master of
 itself, in prosperity or adversity, and possessed of all its
 abilities, when the subjects in hazard are life, or freedom, as
 much as in treating simple questions of interest, are the
 triumphs of magnanimity, and true elevation of mind. 'The event
 of the day is decided. Draw this javelin from my body now,' said
 Epaminondas, 'and let me bleed.'
     In what situation, or by what instruction, is this wonderful
 character to be formed? Is it found in the nurseries of
 affectation, pertness, and vanity, from which fashion is
 propagated, and the genteel is announced? in great and opulent
 cities, where men vie with one another in equipage, dress, and
 the reputation of fortune? Is it within the admired precincts of
 a court, where we may learn to smile without being pleased, to
 caress without affection, to wound with the secret weapons of
 envy and jealousy, and to rest our personal importance on
 circumstances which we cannot always with honour command? No: but
 in a situation where the great sentiments of the heart are
 awakened; where the characters of men, not their situations and
 fortunes, are the principal distinction; where the anxieties of
 interest, or vanity, perish in the blaze of more vigorous
 emotions; and where the human soul, having felt and recognised
 its objects, like an animal who has tasted the blood of his prey,
 cannot descend to pursuits that leave its talents and its force
 unemployed.
     Proper occasions alone operating on a raised and a happy
 disposition, may produce this admirable effect, whilst mere
 instruction may always find mankind at a loss to comprehend its
 meaning, or insensible to its dictates. The case, however, is not
 desperate, till we have formed our system of politics, as well as
 manners; till we have sold our freedom fortifies, equipage, and
 distinctions; till we see no merit but prosperity and power, no
 disgrace but poverty and neglect. What charm of instruction can
 cure the mind that is tainted with this disorder? What syren
 voice can awaken a desire of freedom, that is held to be
 meanness, and a want of ambition? or what persuasion can turn the
 grimace of politeness into real sentiments of humanity and
 candour?
 
 Section VII.
 
 Of Happiness
 
     Having had under our consideration the active powers and the
 moral qualities which distinguish the nature of man, is it still
 necessary that we should treat of his happiness apart? This
 significant term, the most frequent, and the most familiar, in
 our conversation, is, perhaps, on reflection, the least
 understood. It serves to express our satisfaction, when any
 desire is gratified: It is pronounced with a sigh, when our
 object is distant: It means what we wish to obtain, and what we
 seldom stay to examine. We estimate the value of every subject by
 its utility, and its influence on happiness; but we think that
 utility itself, and happiness, require no explanation.
     Those men are commonly esteemed the happiest, whose desires
 are most frequently gratified. But if, in reality, the possession
 of what we desire, and a continued fruition, were requisite to
 happiness, mankind for the most part would have reason to
 complain of their lot. What they call their enjoyments, are
 generally momentary; and the object of sanguine expectation, when
 obtained, no longer continues to occupy the mind: A new passion
 succeeds, and the imagination, as before, is intent on a distant
 felicity.
     How many reflections of this sort are suggested by
 melancholy, or by the effects of that very languor and
 inoccupation into which we would willingly sink, under the notion
 of freedom from care and trouble?
     When we enter on a formal computation of the enjoyments or
 sufferings which are prepared for mankind, it is a chance but we
 find that pain, by its intenseness, its duration, or frequency,
 is greatly predominant. The activity and eagerness with which we
 press from one stage of life to another, our unwillingness to
 return on the paths we have trod, our aversion in age to renew
 the frolics of youth, or to repeat in manhood the amusements of
 children, have been accordingly stated as proofs, that our memory
 of the past, and our feeling of the present, are equal subjects
 of dislike and displeasure.(11*)
     This conclusion, however, like many others, drawn from our
 supposed knowledge of causes, does not correspond with
 experience. In every street, in every village, in every field,
 the greater number of persons we meet, carry an aspect that is
 chearful or thoughtless, indifferent, composed, busy, or
 animated. The labourer whistles to his team, and the mechanic is
 at ease in his calling; the frolicsome and the gay feel a series
 of pleasures, of which we know not the source; even they who
 demonstrate the miseries of human life, when intent on their
 argument, escape from their sorrows, and find a tolerable pastime
 in proving that men are unhappy.
     The very terms pleasure and pain, perhaps, are equivocal; but
 if they are confined, as they appear to be in many of our
 reasonings, to the mere sensations which have a reference to
 external objects, either in the memory of the past, the feeling
 of the present, or the apprehension of the future, it is a great
 error to suppose, that they comprehend all the constituents of
 happiness or misery; or that the good humour of an ordinary life
 is maintained by the prevalence of those pleasures which have
 their separate names, and are, on reflection, distinctly
 remembered.
     The mind, during the greater part of its existence, is
 employed in active exertions, not in merely attending to its own
 feelings of pleasure or pain; and the list of its faculties,
 understanding, memory, foresight, sentiment, will, and intention,
 only contains the names of its different operations.
     In the absence of every sensation to which we commonly give
 the names either of enjoyment or suffering, our very existence
 may have its opposite qualities of happiness or misery; and if
 what we call pleasure or pain, occupies but a small part of human
 life, compared to what passes in contrivance and execution, in
 pursuits and expectations, in conduct, reflection, and social
 engagements; it must appear, that our active pursuits, at least
 on account of their duration, deserve the greater part of our
 attention. When their occasions have failed, the demand is not
 for pleasure, but for something to do; and the very complaints of
 a sufferer are not so sure a mark of distress, as the stare of
 the languid.
     We seldom, however, reckon any task which we are bound to
 perform, among the blessings of life. We always aim at a period
 of pure enjoyment, or a termination of trouble; and overlook the
 source from which most of our present satisfactions are really
 drawn. Ask the busy, Where is the happiness to which they aspire?
 they will answer, perhaps, That it is to be found in the object
 of some present pursuit. If we ask, Why they are not miserable in
 the absence of that happiness? they will say, That they hope to
 attain it. But is it hope alone that supports the mind in the
 midst of precarious and uncertain prospects? and would assurance
 of success fill the intervals of expectation with more pleasing
 emotions? Give the huntsman his prey,give the gamester the gold
 which is staked On the game, that the one may not need to fatigue
 his person, nor the other to perplex his mind, and both will
 probably laugh at our folly. the one will stake his money anew,
 that he may be perplexed; the other will turn his stag to the
 field, that he may hear the cry of the dogs, and follow through
 danger and hardship. Withdraw the occupations of men, terminate
 their desires, existence is a burden, and the iteration of memory
 is a torment.
     The men of this country, says one lady, should learn to sow
 and to knit; it would hinder their time from being a burden to
 themselves, and to other people. That is true, says another; for
 my part, though I never look abroad, I tremble at the prospect of
 bad weather; for then the gentlemen come mopping to us for
 entertainment; and the sight of a husband in distress, is but a
 melancholy spectacle.
     In devising, or in executing a plan, in being carried on the
 tide of emotion and sentiment, the mind seems to unfold its
 being, and to enjoy itself. Even where the end and the object are
 known to be of little avail, the talents and the fancy are often
 intensely applied, and business or play may amuse them alike. We
 only desire repose to recruit our limited and our wasting force:
 when business fatigues, amusement is often but a change of
 occupation. We are not always unhappy, even when we complain.
 There is a kind of affliction which makes an agreeable state of
 the mind; and lamentation itself is sometimes an expression of
 pleasure. The painter and the poet have laid hold of this handle,
 and find, among the means of entertainment, a favourable
 reception for works that are composed to awaken our sorrows.
     To a being of this description, therefore, it is a blessing
 to meet with incentives to action, whether in the desire of
 pleasure, or the aversion to pain. His activity is of more
 importance than the very pleasure he seeks, and langour a greater
 evil than the suffering he shuns.
     The gratifications of animal appetite are of short duration;
 and sensuality is but a distemper of the mind, which ought to be
 cured by remembrance, if it were not perpetually inflamed by
 hope. The chace is not more surely terminated by the death of the
 game, than the joys of the voluptuary by the means of completing
 his debauch. As a bond of society, as a matter of distant
 pursuit, the objects of sense make an important part in the
 system of human life. They lead us to fulfil the purpose of
 nature, in preserving the individual, and in perpetuating the
 species: but to rely on their use as a principal constituent of
 human felicity, were an error in speculation, and would be still
 more an error in practice. Even the master of the seraglio, for
 whom all the treasures of empire are extorted from the hoards of
 its frighted inhabitants, for whom alone the choicest emerald and
 the diamond are drawn from the mine, for whom every breeze is
 enriched with perfumes, for whom beauty is assembled from every
 quarter, and, animated by passions that ripen under the vertical
 sun, is confined to the grate for his use, is still, perhaps,
 more wretched than the very herd of the people, whose labours and
 properties are devoted to relieve him of trouble, and to procure
 him enjoyment.
     Sensuality is easily overcome by any of the habits of pursuit
 which usually engage an active mind. When curiosity is awake, or
 when passion is excited, even in the midst of the feast when
 conversation grows warm, grows jovial, or serious, the pleasures
 of the table we know are forgotten. The boy contemns them for
 play, and the man of age declines them for business.
     When we reckon the circumstances that correspond to the
 nature of any animal, or to that of man in particular, such as
 safety, shelter, food, and the other means of enjoyment or
 preservation, we sometimes think that we have found a sensible
 and a solid foundation on which to rest his felicity. But those
 who are least disposed to moralize, observe, that happiness is
 not connected with fortune, although fortune includes at once all
 the means of subsistence, and the means of sensual indulgence.
 The circumstances that require abstinence, courage, and conduct,
 expose us to hazard, and are in description of the painful kind;
 yet the able, the brave, and the ardent, seem most to enjoy
 themselves when placed in the midst of difficulties, and obliged
 to employ the powers they possess.
     Spinola being told, that Sir Francis Vere died of having
 nothing to do, said, 'That was enough to kill a general.'(12*)
 How many are there to whom war itself is a pastime, who chuse the
 life of a soldier, exposed to dangers and continued fatigues; of
 a mariner, in conflict with every hardship, and bereft of every
 conveniency; of a politician, whose sport is the conduct of
 parties and factions; and who, rather than be idle, will do the
 business of men and of nations for whom he has not the smallest
 regard. Such men do not chuse pain as preferable to pleasure, but
 they are incited by a restless disposition to make continued
 exertions of capacity and resolution; they triumph in the midst
 of their struggles; they droop, and they languish, when the
 occasion of their labour has ceased.
     What was enjoyment, in the sense of that youth, who,
 according to Tacitus, loved danger itself, not the rewards of
 courage? What is the prospect of pleasure, when the sound of the
 horn or the trumpet, the cry of the dogs, or the shout of war,
 awaken the ardour of the sportsman and the soldier? The most
 animating occasions of human life, are calls to danger and
 hardship, not invitations to safety and ease: and man himself, in
 his excellence, is not an animal of pleasure, nor destined merely
 to enjoy what the elements bring to his use; but, like his
 associates, the dog and the horse, to follow the exercises of his
 nature, in preference to what are called its enjoyments; to pine
 in the lap of ease and of affluence, and to exult in the midst of
 alarms that seem to threaten his being. In all which, his
 disposition to action only keeps pace with the variety of powers
 with which he is furnished; and the most respectable attributes
 of his nature, magnanimity, fortitude, and wisdom, carry a
 manifest reference to the difficulties with which he is destined
 to struggle.
     If animal pleasure becomes insipid when the spirit is roused
 by a different object, it is well known likewise, that the sense
 of pain is prevented by any vehement affection of the soul.
 Wounds received in a heat of passion, in the hurry, the ardour,
 or consternation of battle, are never felt till the ferment of
 the mind subsides. Even torments, deliberately applied, and
 industriously prolonged, are borne with firmness, and with an
 appearance of ease, when the mind is possessed with some vigorous
 sentiment, whether of religion, enthusiasm, or love to mankind.
 The continued mortifications of superstitious devotees in several
 ages of the Christian church; the wild penances, still
 voluntarily borne, during many years, by the religionists of the
 east; the contempt in which famine and torture are held by most
 savage nations; the chearful or obstinate patience of the soldier
 in the field; the hardships endured by the sportsman in his
 pastime, show how much we may err in computing the miseries of
 men, from the measures of trouble and of suffering they seem to
 incur. And if there be a refinement in affirming, that their
 happiness is not to be measured by the contrary enjoyments, it is
 a refinement which was made by Regulus and Cincinnatus before the
 date of philosophy; it is a refinement, which every boy knows at
 his play, and every savage confirms, when he looks from his
 forest on the pacific city, and scorns the plantation, whose
 master he cares not to imitate.
     Man, it must be confessed, notwithstanding all this activity
 of his mind, is an animal in the full extent of that designation.
 When the body sickens, the mind droops; and when the blood ceases
 to flow, the soul takes its departure. Charged with the care of
 his preservation, admonished by a sense of pleasure or pain, and
 guarded by an instinctive fear of death, nature has not intrusted
 his safety to the mere vigilance of his understanding, nor to the
 government of his uncertain reflections.
     The distinction betwixt mind and body is followed by
 consequences of the greatest importance; but the facts to which
 we now refer, are not founded on any tenets whatever. They are
 equally true, whether we admit or reject the distinction in
 question, or whether we suppose, that this living agent is formed
 of one, or is an assemblage of separate natures. And the
 materialist, by treating of man as of an engine, cannot make any
 change in the state of his history. He is a being, who, by a
 multiplicity of visible organs, performs a variety of functions.
 His joints are bent, and his muscles relax and contract in our
 sight; the heart beats in his breast, and the blood flows to
 every part of his frame. He performs other operations which we
 cannot refer to any corporeal organ. He perceives, he recollects,
 and forecasts; he desires, and he shuns; he admires, and
 contemns. He enjoys his pleasures, or he endures his pain. All
 these different functions, in some measure, go well or ill
 together. When the motion of the blood is languid, the muscles
 relax, the understanding is tardy, and the fancy is dull: when
 distemper assails him, the physician must attend no less to what
 he thinks, than to what he eats, and examine the returns of his
 passion, together with the strokes of his pulse.
     With all his sagacity, his precautions, and his instincts,
 which are given to preserve his being, he partakes in the fate of
 other animals, and seems to be formed only that he may die.
 Myriads perish before they reach the perfection of their kind;
 and the individual, with an option to owe the prolongation of his
 temporary course to resolution and conduct, or to abject fear,
 frequently chuses the latter, and by a habit of timidity,
 imbitters the life he is so intent to preserve.
     Man, however, at times, exempted from this mortifying lot,
 seems to act without any regard to the length of his period. When
 he thinks intensely, or desires with ardour, pleasures and pains
 from any other quarter assail him in vain. Even in his dying
 hour, the muscles acquire a tone from his spirit, and the mind
 seems to depart in its vigour, and in the midst of a struggle to
 obtain the recent aim of its toils. Muley Moluck, borne on his
 litter, and spent with disease, still fought the battle, in the
 midst of which he expired; and the last effort he made, with a
 finger on his lips, was a signal to conceal his death: the
 precaution, perhaps, of all which he had hitherto taken, the most
 necessary to prevent a defeat.
     Can no reflections aid us in acquiring this habit of the
 soul, so useful in carrying us through many of the ordinary
 scenes of life? If we say, that they cannot, the reality of its
 happiness is not the less evident. The Greeks and the Romans
 considered contempt of pleasure, endurance of pain, and neglect
 of life, as eminent qualities of a man, and a principal subject
 of discipline. They trusted, that the vigorous spirit would find
 worthy objects on which to employ its force; and that the first
 step towards a resolute choice of such objects was to shake off
 the meanness of a solicitous and timorous mind.
     Mankind, in general, have courted occasions to display their
 courage, and frequently, in search of admiration, have presented
 a spectacle, which to those who have ceased to regard fortitude
 on its own account, becomes a subject of horror. Scevola held his
 arm in the fire, to shake the soul of Porsenna. The savage inures
 his body to the torture, that in the hour of trial he may exult
 over his enemy. Even the Mussulman tears his flesh to win the
 heart of his mistress, and comes in gaiety, streaming with blood,
 to shew that he deserves her esteem.(13*)
     Some nations carry the practice of inflicting, or of sporting
 with pain, to a degree that is either cruel or absurd; others
 regard every prospect of bodily suffering as the greatest of
 evils; and in the midst of their troubles, imbitter every real
 affliction, with the terrors of a feeble and dejected
 imagination. We are not bound to answer for the follies of
 either, nor, in treating a question which relates to the nature
 of man, make an estimate of its strength, or its weakness, from
 the habits or apprehensions peculiar to any nation or age.
 
 Section VIII
 
 The same subject continued
 
     Whoever has compared together the different conditions and
 manners of men, under varieties of education or fortune, will be
 satisfied, that mere situation does not constitute their
 happiness or misery; nor a diversity of external observances
 imply any opposition of sentiments on the subject of morality.
 They express their kindness and their enmity in different
 actions; but kindness or enmity is still the principal article of
 consideration. in human life. They engage in different pursuits,
 or acquiesce in different conditions; but act from passions
 nearly the same. There is no precise measure of accommodation
 required to suit their conveniency, nor any degree of danger or
 safety under which they are peculiarly fitted to act. Courage and
 generosity, fear and envy, are not peculiar to any station or
 order of men; nor is there any condition in which some of the
 human race have not shewn, that it is possible to employ, with
 propriety, the talents and virtues of their species.
     What, then, is that mysterious thing called Happiness, which
 may have place in such a variety of stations, and to which
 circumstances in one age or nation thought necessary, are in
 another held to be destructive, or of no effect? It is not the
 succession of mere animal pleasures, which, apart from the
 occupation or the company in which they serve to engage the mind,
 can fill up but a few moments in the duration of life. On too
 frequent a repetition, those pleasures turn to satiety and
 disgust; they tear the constitution to which they are applied in
 excess, and, like the lightning of night, only serve to darken
 the gloom through which they occasionally break. Happiness is not
 that state of repose, or that imaginary freedom from care, which
 at a distance is so frequent an object of desire, but with its
 approach brings a tedium, or a languor, more unsupportable than
 pain itself. If the preceding observations on this subject be
 just, it arises more from the pursuit, than from the attainment
 of any end whatever; and in every new situation to which we
 arrive, even in the course of a prosperous life, it depends more
 on the degree in which our minds are properly employed, than it
 does on the circumstances in which we are destined to act, on the
 materials which are placed in our hands, or the tools with which
 we are furnished.
     If this be confessed in respect to that class of pursuits
 which are distinguished by the name of amusement, and which, in
 the case of men who are commonly deemed the most happy, occupy
 the greater part of human life, we may apprehend, that it holds,
 much more than is commonly suspected, in many cases of business,
 where the end to be gained, and not the occupation, is supposed
 to have the principal value.
     The miser himself, we are told, can sometimes consider the
 care of his wealth as a pastime, and has challenged his heir, to
 have more pleasure in spending, than he in amassing his fortune.
 With this degree of indifference to what may be the conduct of
 others; with this confinement of his care to what he has chosen
 as his own province, more especially if he has conquered in
 himself the passions of jealousy and envy, which tear the
 covetous mind; why may not the man whose object is money, be
 understood to lead a life of amusement and pleasure, not only
 more entire than that of the spendthrift, but even as much as the
 virtuoso, the scholar, the man of taste, or any of that class of
 persons who have found out a method of passing their leisure
 without offence, and to whom the acquisitions made, or the works
 produced, in their several ways, perhaps, are as useless as the
 bag to the miser, or the counter to those who play from mere
 dissipation at any game of skill or of chance?
     We are soon tired of diversions that do not approach to the
 nature of business, that is, that do not engage some passion, or
 give an exercise proportioned to our talents, and our faculties.
 The chace and the gaming-table have each their dangers and
 difficulties, to excite and employ the mind. All games of
 contention animate our emulation, and give a species of
 party-zeal. The mathematician is only to be amused with intricate
 problems, the lawyer and the casuist with cases that try their
 subtilty, and occupy their judgement.
     The desire of active engagements, like every other natural
 appetite, may be carried to excess; and men may debauch in
 amusements, as well as in the use of wine, or other intoxicating
 liquors. At first, a trifling stake, and the occupation of a
 moderate passion, may have served to amuse the gamester; but when
 the drug becomes familiar, it fails to produce its effect: The
 play is made deep, and the interest increased, to awaken his
 attention; he is carried on by degrees, and in the end comes to
 seek for amusement, and to find it only in those passions of
 anxiety, hope, and despair, which are roused by the hazard into
 which he has thrown the whole of his fortunes.
     If men can thus turn their amusements into a scene more
 serious and interesting than that of business itself, it will be
 difficult to assign a reason, why business, and many of the
 occupations of human life, independent of any distant
 consequences, or future events, may not be chosen as an
 amusement, and adopted on account of the pastime they bring. This
 is, perhaps, the foundation on which, without the aid of
 reflection, the contented and the chearful have rested the gaiety
 of their tempers. It is perhaps the most solid basis of fortitude
 which any reJection can lay; and happiness itself is secured, by
 making a certain species of conduct our amusement; and, by
 considering life, in the general estimate of its value, as well
 as on every particular occasion, as a mere scene for the exercise
 of the mind, and the engagements of the heart. 'I will try and
 attempt every thing,' says Brutus, 'I will never cease to recal
 my country from this state of servility. If the event be
 favourable, it will prove matter of joy to us all; if not, yet I,
 notwithstanding, shall rejoice. 'Why rejoice in a disappointment?
 Why not be dejected, when his country was overwhelmed? Because
 sorrow, perhaps, and dejection, can do no good. Nay, but they
 must be endured when they come. And whence should they come to
 me? might the Roman say; I have followed my mind, and can follow
 it still. Events may have changed the situation in which I am
 destined to act; but can they hinder my acting the part of a man?
 Shew me a situation in which a man can neither act nor die, and I
 will own he is wretched.
     Whoever has the force of mind steadily to view human life
 under this aspect, has only to chuse well his occupations, in
 order to command that state of enjoyment, and freedom of soul,
 which probably constitute the peculiar felicity to which his
 active nature is destined.
     The dispositions of men, and consequently their occupations,
 are commonly divided into two principal classes; the selfish, and
 the social. The first are indulged in solitude; and if they carry
 a reference to mankind, it is that of emulation, competition, and
 enmity. The second incline us to live with our fellow-creatures,
 and to do them good; they tend to unite the members of society
 together; they terminate in a mutual participation of their cares
 and enjoyments, and render the presence of men an occasion of
 joy. Under this class may be enumerated the passions of the
 sexes, the affections of parents and children, general humanity,
 or singular attachments; above all, that habit of the soul by
 which we consider ourselves as but a part of some beloved
 community, and as but individual members of some society, whose
 general welfare is to us the supreme object of zeal, and the
 great rule of our conduct. This affection is a principle of
 candour, which knows no partial distinctions, and is confined to
 no bounds: it may extend its effects beyond our personal
 acquaintance; it may, in the mind, and in thought, at least, make
 us feel a relation to the universe, and to the whole creation of
 God. 'Shall any one,' says Antoninus, 'love the city of Cecrops,
 and you not love the city of God?'
     No emotion of the heart is indifferent. It is either an act
 of vivacity and joy, or a feeling of sadness; a transport of
 pleasure, or a convulsion of anguish: and the exercises of our
 different dispositions, as well as their gratifications, are
 likely to prove matter of the greatest importance to our
 happiness or misery.
     The individual is charged with the care of his animal
 preservation. He may exist in solitude, and, far removed from
 society, perform many functions of sense, imagination, and
 reason. He is even rewarded for the proper discharge of those
 functions; and all the natural exercises which relate to himself,
 as well as to his fellow-creatures, not only occupy without
 distressing him, but in many instances are attended with positive
 pleasures, and fill up the hours of life with agreeable
 occupation.
     There is a degree, however, in which we suppose that the care
 of ourselves becomes a source of painful anxiety and cruel
 passions; in which it degenerates into avarice, vanity, or pride;
 and in which, by fostering habits of jealousy and envy, of fear
 and malice, it becomes as destructive of our own enjoyments, as
 it is hostile to the welfare of mankind. This evil, however, is
 not to be charged upon any excess in the care of ourselves, but
 upon a mere mistake in the choice of our objects. We look abroad
 for a happiness which is to be found only in the qualities of the
 heart: we think ourselves dependent on accidents; and are
 therefore kept in suspense and solicitude: we think ourselves
 dependent on the will of other men; and are therefore servile and
 timid: we think our felicity is placed in subjects for which our
 fellow-creatures are rivals and competitors; and in pursuit of
 happiness, we engage in those scenes of emulation, envy, hatred,
 animosity, and revenge, that lead to the highest pitch of
 distress. We act, in short, as if to preserve ourselves were to
 retain our weakness, and perpetuate our sufferings. We charge the
 ills of a distempered imagination, and a corrupt heart, to the
 account of our fellow-creatures, to whom we refer the pangs of
 our disappointment or malice; and while we foster our misery, are
 surprised that the care of ourselves is attended with no better
 effects. But he who remembers that he is by nature a rational
 being, and a member of society; that to preserve himself, is to
 preserve his reason, and to preserve the best feelings of his
 heart; will encounter with none of these inconveniencies; and in
 the care of himself, will find subjects only of satisfaction and
 triumph.
     The division of our appetites into benevolent and selfish,
 has probably, in some degree, helped to mislead our apprehension
 on the subject of personal enjoyment and private good; and our
 zeal to prove that virtue is disinterested, has not greatly
 promoted its cause. The gratification of a selfish desire, it is
 thought, brings advantage or pleasure to ourselves; that of
 benevolence terminates in the pleasure or advantage of others:
 whereas, in reality, the gratification of every desire is a
 personal enjoyment, and its value being proportioned to the
 particular quality or force of the sentiment, it may happen that
 the same person may reap a greater advantage from the good
 fortune he has procured to another, than from that he has
 obtained for himself.
     While the gratifications of benevolence, therefore, are as
 much our own as those of any other desire whatever, the mere
 exercises of this disposition are, on many accounts, to be
 considered as the first and the principal constituent of human
 happiness. Every act of kindness, or of care, in the parent to
 his child; every emotion of the heart. in friendship or in love,
 in public zeal, or general humanity, are so many acts of
 enjoyment and satisfaction. Pity itself, and compassion, even
 grief and melancholy, when grafted on some tender affection,
 partake of the nature of the stock; and if they are not positive
 pleasures, are at least pains of a peculiar nature, which we do
 not even wish to exchange but for a very real enjoyment, obtained
 in relieving our object. Even extremes, in this class of our
 dispositions, as they are the reverse of hatred, envy, and
 malice, so they are never attended with those excruciating
 anxieties, jealousies, and fears, which tear the interested mind;
 or if, in reality, any ill passion arise from a pretended
 attachment to our fellow-creatures, that attachment may be safely
 condemned, as not genuine. If we be distrustful or jealous, our
 pretended affection is probably no more than a desire of
 attention and personal consideration, a motive which frequently
 inclines us to be connected with our fellow-creatures; but to
 which we are as frequently willing to sacrifice their happiness.
 We consider them as the tools of our vanity, pleasure, or
 interest; not as the parties on whom we may bestow the effects of
 our good-will, and our love.
     A mind devoted to this class of its affections, being
 occupied with an object that may engage it habitually, is not
 reduced to court the amusements or pleasures with which persons
 of an ill temper are obliged to repair their disgusts: and
 temperance becomes an easy task when gratifications of sense are
 supplanted by those of the heart. Courage too is most easily
 assumed, or is rather inseparable from that ardour of the mind,
 in society, friendship, or in public action, which makes us
 forget subjects of personal anxiety or fear, and attend chiefly
 to the object of our zeal or affection, not to the trifling
 inconveniencies, dangers, or hardships, which we ourselves may
 encounter in striving to maintain it.
     It should seem, therefore, to be the happiness of man, to
 make his social dispositions the ruling spring of his
 occupations; to state himself as the member of a community, for
 whose general good his heart may glow with an ardent zeal, to the
 suppression of those personal cares which are the foundation of
 painful anxieties, fear, jealousy, and envy; or, as Mr Pope
 expresses the same sentiment;
 
     'Man, like the generous vine, supported lives;
      The strength he gains, is from th'embrace he gives.'(14*)
 
     If this be the good of the individual, it is likewise that of
 mankind; and virtue no longer imposes a task by which we are
 obliged to bestow upon others that good from which we ourselves
 refrain; but supposes, in the highest degree, as possessed by
 ourselves, that state of felicity which we are required to
 promote in the world.
     We commonly apprehend, that it is our duty to do kindnesses,
 and our happiness to receive them: but if, in reality, courage,
 and a heart devoted to the good of mankind, are the constituents
 of human felicity, the kindness which is done infers a happiness
 in the person from whom it proceeds, not in him on whom it is
 bestowed; and the greatest good which men possessed of fortitude
 and generosity can procure to their fellow-creatures, is a
 participation of this happy character. 'You will confer the
 greatest benefit on your city,' says Epictetus, 'not by raising
 the roofs, but by exalting the souls of your fellow-citizens; for
 it is better that great souls should live in small habitations,
 than that abject slaves should burrow in great houses.'(15*)
     To the benevolent, the satisfaction of others is a ground of
 enjoyment; and existence itself, in a world that is governed by
 the wisdom of God, is a blessing. The mind, freed from cares that
 lead to pusillanimity and meanness, becomes calm, active,
 fearless, and bold; capable of every enterprise, and vigorous in
 the exercise of every talent, by which the nature of man is
 adorned. On this foundation was raised the admirable character,
 which, during a certain period of their story, distinguished the
 celebrated nations of antiquity, and rendered familiar and
 ordinary in their manners, examples of magnanimity, which, under
 governments less favourable to the public affections, rarely
 occur; or which, without being much practised, or even
 understood, are made subjects of admiration and swelling
 panegyric. 'Thus,' says Xenophon, 'died Thrasybulus; who indeed
 appears to have been a good man.' What valuable praise, and how
 significant to those who know the story of this admirable person!
 The members of those illustrious states, from the habit of
 considering themselves as part of a community, or at least as
 deeply involved with some order of men in the state, were
 regardless of personal considerations. they had a perpetual view
 to objects which excite a great ardour in the soul; which led
 them to act perpetually in the view of their fellow-citizens, and
 to practise those arts of deliberation, elocution, policy, and
 war, on which the fortunes of nations, or of men, in their
 collective body, depend. To the force of mind collected in this
 career, and to the improvements of wit which were made in
 pursuing it, these nations owed, not only their magnanimity, and
 the superiority of their political and military conduct, but even
 the arts of poetry and literature, which among them were only the
 inferior appendages of a genius otherwise excited, cultivated,
 and refined.
     To the ancient Greek, or the Roman, the individual was
 nothing, and the public every thing. To the modern, in too many
 nations of Europe, the individual is every thing, and the public
 nothing. The state is merely a combination of departments, in
 which consideration, wealth, eminence, or power, are offered as
 the reward of service. It was the nature of modern government,
 even in its first institution, to bestow on every individual a
 fixed station and dignity, which he was to maintain for himself.
 Our ancestors, in rude ages, during the recess of wars from
 abroad, fought for their personal claims at home, and by their
 competitions, and the balance of their powers, maintained a kind
 of political freedom in the state, while private parties were
 subject to continual wrongs and oppressions. Their posterity, in
 times more polished, have repressed the civil disorders in which
 the activity of earlier ages chiefly consisted; but they employ
 the calm they have gained, not in fostering a zeal for those
 laws, and that constitution of government, to which they owe
 their protection, but in practising apart, and each for himself,
 the several arts of personal advancement, or profit, which their
 political establishments may enable them to pursue with success.
 Commerce, which may be supposed to comprehend every lucrative
 art, is accordingly considered as the great object of nations,
 and the principal study of mankind.
     So much are we accustomed to consider personal fortune as the
 sole object of care, that even under popular establishments, and
 in states where different orders of men are summoned to partake
 in the government of their country, and where the liberties they
 enjoy cannot be long preserved, without vigilanCe and activity on
 the part of the subject; still they, who, in the vulgar phrase,
 have not their fortunes to make, are supposed to be at a loss for
 occupation, and betake themselves to solitary pastimes, or
 cultivate what they are pleased to call a taste for gardening,
 building, drawing, or music. With this aid, they endeavour to
 fill up the blanks of a listless life, and avoid the necessity of
 curing their languors by any positive service to their country,
 or to mankind.
     The weak or the malicious are well employed in any thing that
 is innocent, and are fortunate in finding any occupation which
 prevents the effects of a temper that would prey upon themselves,
 or upon their fellow-creatures. But they who are blessed with a
 happy disposition, with capacity and vigour, incur a real
 debauchery, by having any amusement that occupies an improper
 share of their time; and are really cheated of their happiness,
 in bring made to believe, that any occupation or pastime is
 better fitted to amuse themselves, than that which at the same
 time produces some real good to their fellow-creatures.
     This sort of entertainment, indeed, cannot be the choice of
 the mercenary, the envious, or the malignant. Its value is known
 only to persons of an opposite temper; and to their experience
 alone we appeal. Guided by mere disposition, and without the aid
 of reflection, in business, in friendship, and in public life,
 they often acquit themselves well; and borne with satisfaction on
 the tide of their emotions and sentiments, enjoy the present
 hour, without recollection of the past, or hopes of the future.
 It is in speculation, not in practice, they are made to discover,
 that virtue is a task of severity and self-denial.
 
 Section IX
 
 Of National Felicity
 
     Man is, by nature, the member of a community; and when
 considered in this capacity, the individual appears to be no
 longer made for himself. He must forego his happiness and his
 freedom, where these interfere with the good of society. He is
 only part of a whole; and the praise we think due to his virtue,
 is but a branch of that more general commendation we bestow on
 the member of a body, on the part of a fabric or engine, for
 being well fitted to occupy its place, and to produce its effect.
     If this follow from the relation of a part to its whole, and
 if the public good be the principal object with individuals, it
 is likewise true, that the happiness of individuals is the great
 end of civil society: for in what sense can a public enjoy any
 good, if its members, considered apart, be unhappy?
     The interests of society, however, and of its members, are
 easily reconciled. If the individual owe every degree of
 consideration to the public, he receives, in paying that very
 consideration, the greatest happiness of which his nature is
 capable; and the greatest blessing that the public can bestow on
 its members, is to keep them attached to itself. That is the most
 happy state, which is most beloved by its subjects; and they are
 the most happy men, whose hearts are engaged to a community, in
 which they find every object of generosity and zeal, and a scope
 to the exercise of every talent, and of every virtuous
 disposition.
     After we have thus found general maxims, the greater part of
 our trouble remains, their just application to particular cases.
 Nations are different in respect to their extent, numbers of
 people, and wealth; in respect to the arts they practise, and the
 accommodations they have procured. These circumstances may not
 only affect the manners of men; they even, in our esteem, come
 into competition with the article of manners itself; are supposed
 to constitute a national felicity, independent of virtue; and
 give a title, upon which we indulge our own vanity, and that of
 other nations, as we do that of private men, on the score of
 their fortunes and honours.
     But if this way of measuring happiness, when applied to
 private men, be ruinous and false, it is so no less when applied
 to nations. Wealth, commerce, extent of territory, and the
 knowledge of arts, are, when properly employed, the means of
 preservation, and the foundations of power. If they fail in part,
 the nation is weakened; if they were entirely with-held, the race
 would perish: their tendency is to maintain numbers of men, but
 not to constitute happiness. They will accordingly maintain the
 wretched, as well as the happy. They answer one purpose, but are
 not therefore sufficient for all; and are of little significance,
 when only employed to maintain a timid, dejected, and servile
 people.
     Great and powerful states are able to overcome and subdue the
 weak; polished and commercial nations have more wealth, and
 practise a greater variety of arts, than the rude: but the
 happiness of men, in all cases alike, consists in the blessings
 of a candid, an active, and strenuous mind. And if we consider
 the state of society merely as that into which mankind are led by
 their propensities, as a state to be valued from its effect in
 preserving the species, in ripening their talents, and exciting
 their virtues, we need not enlarge our communities, in order to
 enjoy these advantages. We frequently obtain them in the most
 remarkable degree, where nations remain independent, and are of a
 small extent.
     To increase the numbers of mankind, may be admitted as a
 great and important object: but to extend the limits of any
 particular state, is not, perhaps, the way to obtain it; while we
 desire that our fellow-creatures should multiply, it does not
 follow, that the whole should, if possible, be united under one
 head. We are apt to admire the empire of the Romans, as a model
 of national greatness and splendour: but the greatness we admire
 in this case, was ruinous to the virtue and the happiness of
 mankind; it was found to be inconsistent with all the advantages
 which that conquering people had formerly enjoyed in the articles
 of government and manners.
     The emulation of nations proceeds from their division. A
 cluster of states, like a company of men, find the exercise of
 their reason, and the test of their virtues, in the affairs they
 transact, upon a foot of equality, and of separate interest. The
 measures taken for safety, including great part of the national
 policy, are relative in every state to what is apprehended from
 abroad. Athens was necessary to Sparta, in the exercise of her
 virtue, as steel is to flint in the production of fire; and if
 the cities of Greece had been united under one head, we should
 never have heard of Epaminondas or Thrasybulus, of Lycurgus or
 Solon.
     When we reason in behalf of our species, therefore, although
 we may lament the abuses which sometimes arise from independence,
 and opposition of interest; yet, whilst any degrees of virtue
 remain with mankind, we cannot wish to croud, under one
 establishment, numbers of men who may serve to constitute
 several; or to commit affairs to the conduct of one senate, one
 legislative or executive power, which, upon a distinct and
 separate footing, might furnish an exercise of ability, and a
 theatre of glory, to many.
     This may be a subject upon which no determinate rule can be
 given, but the admiration of boundless dominion is a ruinous
 error; and in no instance, perhaps, is the real interest of
 mankind more entirely mistaken.
     The measure of enlargement to be wished for any particular
 state, is often to be taken from the condition of its neighbours.
 Where a number of states are contiguous, they should be near an
 equality, in order that they may be mutually objects of respect
 and consideration, and in order that they may possess that
 independence in which the political life of a nation consists.
     When the kingdoms of Spain were united, when the great fiefs
 in France were annexed to the crown, it was no longer expedient
 for the nations of Great Britain to continue disjoined.
     The small republics of Greece, indeed, by their subdivisions,
 and the balance of their power, found almost in every village the
 object of nations. Every little district was a nursery of
 excellent men, and what is now the wretched corner of a great
 empire, was the field on which mankind have reaped their
 principal honours. But in modern Europe, republics of a similar
 extent, are like shrubs, under the shade of a taller wood, choked
 by the neighbourhood of more powerful states. In their case, a
 certain disproportion of force frustrates, in a great measure,
 the advantage of separation. They are like the trader in Poland,
 who is the more despicable, and the less secure, that he is
 neither master nor slave.
     Independent communities, in the mean time, however weak, are
 averse to a coalition, not only where it comes with an air of
 imposition, or unequal treaty, but even where it implies no more
 than the admission of new members to an equal share of
 consideration with the old. The citizen has no interest in the
 annexation of kingdoms; he must find his importance diminished,
 as the state is enlarged: but ambitious men, under the
 enlargement of territory, find a more plentiful harvest of power,
 and of wealth, while government itself is an easier task. Hence
 the ruinous progress of empire; and hence free nations, under the
 shew of acquiring dominion, suffer themselves, in the end, to be
 yoked with the slaves they had conquered.
     Our desire to augment the force of a nation is the only
 pretext for enlarging its territory; but this measure, when
 pursued to extremes, seldom fails to frustrate itself.
     Notwithstanding the advantage of numbers, and superior
 resources in war, the strength of a nation is derived from the
 character, not from the wealth, nor from the multitude of its
 people. If the treasure of a state can hire numbers of men, erect
 ramparts, and furnish the implements of war; the possessions of
 the fearful are easily seized; a timorous multitude falls into
 rout of itself; ramparts may be scaled where they are not
 defended by valour; and arms are of consequence only in the hands
 of the brave. The band to which Agesilaus pointed as the wall of
 his city, made a defence for their country more permanent, and
 more effectual, than the rock and the cement with which other
 cities were fortified.
     We should owe little to that statesman who were to contrive a
 defence that might supersede the external uses of virtue. It is
 wisely ordered for man, as a rational being, that the employment
 of reason is necessary to his preservation: it is fortunate for
 him, in the pursuit of distinction, that his personal
 consideration depends on his character; and it is fortunate for
 nations, that, in order to be powerful and safe, they must strive
 to maintain the courage, and cultivate the virtues, of their
 people. By the use of such means, they at once gain their
 external ends, and are happy.
     Peace and unanimity are commonly considered as the principal
 foundations of public felicity; yet the rivalship of separate
 communities, and the agitations of a free people, are the
 principles of political life, and the school of men. How shall we
 reconcile these jarring and opposite tenets? It is, perhaps, not
 necessary to reconcile them, 'The pacific may do what they can to
 allay the animosities, and to reconcile the opinions, of men; and
 it will be happy if they can succeed in repressing their crimes,
 and in calming the worst of their passions. Nothing, in the mean
 time, but corruption or slavery can suppress the debates that
 subsist among men of integrity, who bear an equal part in the
 administration of state.
     A perfect agreement in matters of opinion is not to be
 obtained, and if it were, what would become in the most select
 company' of society? 'The Spartan legislator,' says Plutarch,
 'appears to have sown the seeds of variance and dissension among
 his countrymen: he meant that good citizens should be led to
 dispute; he considered emulation as the brand by which their
 virtues were kindled; and seemed to apprehend, that a
 complaisance, by which men submit their opinions without
 examination, is a principal source of corruption.'
     Forms of government are supposed to decide of the happiness
 or misery of mankind. But forms of government must be varied, in
 order to suit the extent, the way of subsistence, the character,
 and the manners of different nations. In some cases, the
 multitude may be suffered to govern themselves; in others, they
 must be severely restrained. The inhabitants of a village in some
 primitive age, may have been safely intrusted to the conduct of
 reason, and to the suggestion of their innocent views; but the
 tenants of Newgate can scarcely be trusted, with chains locked to
 their bodies, and bars of iron fixed to their legs. How is it
 possible, therefore, to find any single form of government that
 would suit mankind in every condition?
     We proceed, however, in the following section, to point out
 the distinctions, and to explain the language which occurs in
 this place, on the head of different models for subordination and
 government.
 
 SEction X
 
 The same subject continued
 
     It is a common observation, That mankind were originally
 equal. They have indeed by nature equal rights to their
 preservation, and to the use of their talents; but they are
 fitted for different stations; and when they are classed by a
 rule taken from this circumstance, they suffer no injustice on
 the side of their natural rights. It is obvious, that some mode
 of subordination is as necessary to men as society itself; and
 this, not only to attain the ends of government, but to comply
 with an order established by nature.
     Prior to any political institution whatever, men are
 qualified by a great diversity of talents, by a different tone of
 the soul, and ardour of the passions, to act a variety of parts.
 Bring them together, each will find his place. They censure or
 applaud in a body; they consult and deliberate in more select
 parties; they take or give an ascendant as individuals; and
 numbers are by this means fitted to act in company, and to
 preserve their communities, before any formal distribution of
 office is made.
     We are formed to act in this manner; and if we have any
 doubts with relation to the rights of government in general, we
 owe our perplexity more to the subtilties of the speculative,
 than to any uncertainty in the feelings of the heart. Involved in
 the resolutions of our company, we move with the croud before we
 have determined the rule by which its will is collected. We
 follow a leader, before we have settled the ground of his
 pretensions, or adjusted the form of his election: and it is not
 till after mankind have committed many errors in the capacities
 of magistrate and subject, that they think of making government
 itself a subject of rules.
     If therefore, in considering the variety of forms under which
 societies subsist, the casuist is pleased to inquire, What title
 one man, or any number of men, have to controul his actions? he
 may be answered, None at all, provided that his actions have no
 effect to the prejudice of his fellow-creatures; but if they
 have, the rights of defence, and the obligation to repress the
 commission of wrongs, belong to collective bodies, as well as to
 individuals. Many rude nations, having no formal tribunals for
 the judgement of crimes, assemble, when alarmed by any flagrant
 offence, and take their measures with the criminal as they would
 with an enemy.
     But will this consideration, which confirms the title to
 sovereignty, where it is exercised by the society in its
 collective capacity, or by those to whom the powers of the whole
 are committed, likewise support the claim to dominion, where-ever
 it is casually lodged, or even where it is only maintained by
 force?
     This question may be sufficiently answered, by observing,
 that a right to do justice, and to do good, is competent to every
 individual, or order of men., and that the exercise of this right
 has no limits but in the defect of power. But a right to do
 wrong, and commit injustice, is an abuse of language, and a
 contradiction in terms. It is no more competent to the collective
 body of a people, than it is to any single usurper. When we admit
 such a prerogative in the case of any sovereign, we can only mean
 to express the extent of his power, and the force with which he
 is enabled to execute his pleasure. Such a prerogative is assumed
 by the leader of banditti at the head of his gang, or by a
 despotic prince at the head of his troops, When the sword is
 presented by either, the traveller or the inhabitant may submit
 from a sense of necessity or fear; but he lies under no
 obligation from a motive of duty or justice.
     The multiplicity of forms, in the mean time, which different
 societies offer to our view, is almost infinite. The classes into
 which they distribute their members, the manner in which they
 establish the legislative and executive powers, the imperceptible
 circumstances by which they are led to have different customs,
 and to confer on their governors unequal measures of power and
 authority, give rise to perpetual distinctions between
 constitutions the most nearly resembling one another, and give to
 human affairs a variety in detail, which, in its full extent, no
 understanding can comprehend, and no memory retain.
     In order to have a general and comprehensive knowledge of the
 whole, we must be determined on this, as on every other subject,
 to overlook many particulars and singularities, distinguishing
 different governments; to fix our attention on certain points, in
 which many agree; and thereby establish a few general heads,
 under which the subject may be distinctly considered. When we
 have marked the characteristics which form the general points of
 coincidence; when we have pursued them to their consequences in
 the several modes of legislation, execution, and judicature, in
 the establishments which relate to police, commerce, religion, or
 domestic life; we have made an acquisition of knowledge, which,
 though it does not supersede the necessity of experience, may
 serve to direct our inquiries, and, in the midst of affairs, to
 give an order and a method for the arrangement of particulars
 that occur to our observation.
     When I recollect what the President Montesquieu has written,
 I am at a loss to tell, why I should treat of human affairs: but
 I too am instigated by my reflections, and my sentiments; and I
 may utter them more to the comprehension of ordinary capacities,
 because I am more on the level of ordinary men. If it be
 necessary to pave the way for what follows on the general history
 of nations, by giving some account of the heads under which
 various forms of government may be conveniently ranged, the
 reader should perhaps be referred to what has been already
 delivered on the subject by this profound politician and amiable
 moralist. In his writings will be found, not only the original of
 what I am now, for the sake of order, to copy from him, but
 likewise probably the source of many observations, which, in
 different places, I may, under the belief of invention, have
 repeated, without quoting their author.
     The ancient philosophers treated of government commonly under
 three heads; the Democratic, the Aristocratic, and the Despotic.
 Their attention was chiefly occupied with the varieties of
 republican government; and they paid little regard to a very
 important distinction, which Mr Montesquieu has made, between
 despotism and monarchy. He too has considered government as
 reducible to three general forms; and, 'to understand the nature
 of each,' he observes, 'it is sufficient to recal ideas which are
 familiar with men of the least reflection, who admit three
 definitions, or rather three facts: That a republic is a state in
 which the people in a collective body, or a part of the people,
 possess the sovereign power: That monarchy is that in which one
 man governs, according to fixed and determinate laws: And a
 despotism is that in which one man, without law, or rule of
 administration, by the mere impulse of will or caprice, decides,
 and carries every thing before him.'
     Republics admit of a very material distinction, which is
 pointed out in the general definition; that between democracy and
 aristocracy. In the first, supreme power remains in the hands of
 the collective body. Every office of magistracy, at the
 nomination of this sovereign, is open to every citizen; who, in
 the discharge of his duty, becomes the minister of the people,
 and accountable to them for every object of his trust.
     In the second, the sovereignty is lodged in a particular
 class, or order of men; who, being once named, continue for life;
 or by the hereditary distinctions of birth and fortune, are
 advanced to a station of permanent superiority. From this order,
 and by their nomination, all the offices o?magistracy are
 filled; and in the different assemblies which they constitute,
 whatever relates to the legislation, the execution, or
 jurisdiction, is finally determined.
     Mr Montesquieu has pointed out the sentiments or maxims from
 which men must be supposed to act under these different
 governments.
     In democracy, they must love equality; they must respect the
 rights of their fellow-citizens; they must unite by the common
 ties of affection to the state. In forming personal pretensions,
 they must be satisfied with that degree of consideration they can
 procure by their abilities fairly measured with those of an
 opponent; they must labour for the public without hope of profit;
 they must reject every attempt to create a personal dependence.
 Candour, force, and elevation of mind, in short, are the props of
 democracy; and virtue is the principle of conduct required to its
 preservation.
     How beautiful a pre-eminence on the side of popular
 government! and how ardently should mankind wish for the form, if
 it tended to establish the principle, or were, in every instance,
 a sure indication of its presence!
     But perhaps we must have possessed the principle, in order,
 with any hopes of advantage, to receive the form; and where the
 first is entirely extinguished, the other may be fraught with
 evil, if any additional evil deserves to be shunned where men are
 already unhappy.
     At Constantinople or Algiers, it is a miserable spectacle
 when men pretend to act on a foot of equality: they only mean to
 shake off the restraints of government, and to seize as much as
 they can of that spoil, which, in ordinary times, is ingrossed by
 the master they serve.
     It is one advantage of democracy, that the principal ground
 of distinction being personal qualities, men are classed
 according to their abilities, and to the merit of their actions.
 Though all have equal pretensions to power, yet the state is
 actually governed by a few. The majority of the people, even in
 their capacity of sovereign, only pretend to employ their senses;
 to feel, when pressed by national inconveniencies, or threatened
 by public dangers; and with the ardour which is apt to arise in
 crouded assemblies, to urge the pursuits in which they are
 engaged, or to repel the attacks with which they are menaced.
     The most perfect equality of rights can never exclude the
 ascendant of superior minds, nor the assemblies of a collective
 body govern without the direction of select councils. On this
 account, popular government may be confounded with aristocracy.
 But this alone does not constitute the character of
 aristocratical government. Here the members of the state are
 divided, at least, into two classes; of which one is destined to
 command, the other to obey. No merits or defects can raise or
 sink a person from one class to the other. The only effect of
 personal character is, to procure the individual a suitable
 degree of consideration with his own order, not to vary his rank.
 In one situation he is taught to assume, in another to yield the
 pre-eminence. He occupies the station of patron or client, and is
 either the sovereign or the subject of his country. The whole
 citizens may unite in executing the plans of state, but never in
 deliberating on its measures, or enacting its laws. What belongs
 to the whole people under democracy, is here confined to a part.
 Members of the superior order, are among themselves, possibly,
 classed according to their abilities, but retain a perpetual
 ascendant over those of inferior station. They are at once the
 servants and the masters of the state, and pay with their
 personal attendance and their blood for the civil or military
 honours they enjoy.
     To maintain for himself, and to admit in his fellow-citizen,
 a perfect equality of privilege and station, is no longer the
 leading maxim of the member of such a community. The rights of
 men are modified by their condition. One order claims more than
 it is willing to yield; the other must be ready to yield what it
 does not assume to itself: and it is with good reason that Mr
 Montesquieu gives to the principle of such governments the name
 of moderation, not of virtue.
     The elevation of one class is a moderated arrogance; the
 submission of the other a limited deference. The first must be
 careful, by concealing the invidious part of their distinction,
 to palliate what is grievous in the public arrangement, and by
 their education, their cultivated manners, and improved talents,
 to appear qualified for the stations they occupy. The other must
 be taught to yield, from respect and personal attachment, what
 could not otherwise be extorted by force. When this moderation
 fails on either side, the constitution totters. A populace
 enraged to mutiny, may claim the right of equality to which they
 are admitted in democratical states; or a nobility bent on
 dominion, may chuse among themselves, or find already pointed out
 to them, a sovereign, who, by advantages of fortune, popularity,
 or abilities, is ready to seize for his own family, that envied
 power, which has already carried his order beyond the limits of
 moderation, and infected particular men with a boundless
 ambition.
     Monarchies have accordingly been found with the recent marks
 of aristocracy. There, however, the monarch is only the first
 among the nobles; he must be satisfied with a limited power; his
 subjects are ranged into classes; he finds on every quarter a
 pretence to privilege, that circumscribes his authority; and he
 finds a force sufficient to confine his administration within
 certain bounds of equity, and determinate laws.
     Under such governments, however, the love of equality is
 preposterous, and moderation itself is unnecessary. The object of
 every rank is precedency, and every order may display its
 advantages to their full extent. The sovereign himself owes great
 part of his authority to the sounding titles and the dazzling
 equipage which he exhibits in public. The subordinate ranks lay
 claim to importance by a like exhibition, and for that purpose
 carry in every instant the ensigns of their birth, or the
 ornaments of their fortune. What else could mark out to the
 individual the relation in which he stands to his
 fellow-subjects, or distinguish the numberless ranks that fill up
 the interval between the state of the sovereign and that of the
 peasant? Or what else could, in states of a great extent,
 preserve any appearance of order, among members disunited by
 ambition and interest, and destined to form a community, without
 the sense of any common concern?
     Monarchies are generally found, where the state is enlarged
 in population and in territory, beyond the numbers and dimensions
 that are consistent with republican government. Together with
 these circumstances, great inequalities arise in the distribution
 of property; and the desire of pre-eminence becomes the
 predominant passion. Every rank would exercise its prerogative,
 and the sovereign is perpetually tempted to enlarge his own; if
 subjects, who despair of precedence, plead for equality, he is
 willing to favour their claims, and to aid them in procuring what
 must weaken a force, with which he himself is, on many occasions,
 obliged to contend. In the event of such a policy, many invidious
 distinctions and grievances peculiar to monarchical government,
 may, in appearance, be removed; but the state of equality to
 which the subjects approach, is that of slaves, equally dependent
 on the will of a master, not that of freemen in a condition to
 maintain their own.
     The principle of monarchy, according to Montesquieu, is
 honour. Men may possess good qualities, elevation of mind, and
 fortitude; but the sense of equality, that will bear no
 incroachment on the personal rights of the meanest citizen; the
 indignant spirit, that will not court a protection, nor accept as
 a favour, what is due as a right; the public affection, which is
 founded on the neglect of personal considerations, are neither
 consistent with the preservation of the constitution, nor
 agreeable to the habits acquired in any station assigned to its
 members.
     Every condition is possessed of peculiar dignity, and points
 out a propriety of conduct, which men of station are obliged to
 maintain. In the commerce of superiors and inferiors, it is the
 object of ambition, and of vanity, to refine on the advantages of
 rank; while, to facilitate the intercourse of polite society, it
 is the aim of good breeding, to disguise or reject them.
     Though the objects of consideration are rather the dignities
 of station than personal qualities; though friendship cannot be
 formed by mere inclination, nor alliances by the mere choice of
 the heart; yet men so united, and even without changing their
 order, are highly susceptible of moral excellence, or liable to
 many different degrees of corruption. They may act a vigorous
 part as members of the state, an amiable one in the commerce of
 private society; or they may yield up their dignity as citizens,
 even while they raise their arrogance and presumption as private
 parties.
     In monarchy, all orders of men derive their honours from the
 crown; but they continue to hold them as a right, and they
 exercise a subordinate power in the state, founded on the
 permanent rank they enjoy, and on the attachment of those whom
 they are appointed to lead and protect. Though they do not force
 themselves into national councils, and public assemblies, and
 though the name of senate is unknown; yet the sentiments they
 adopt must have weight with the sovereign; and every individual,
 in his separate capacity, in some measure, deliberates for his
 country. In whatever does not derogate from his rank, he has an
 arm ready to serve the community; in whatever alarms his sense of
 honour, he has aversions and dislikes, which amount to a negative
 on the will of his prince.
     Intangled together by the reciprocal ties of dependence and
 protection, though not combined by the sense of a common
 interest, the subjects of monarchy, like those of republics, find
 themselves occupied as the members of an active society, and
 engaged to treat with their fellow-creatures on a liberal
 footing. If those principles of honour which save the individual
 from servility in his own person, or from becoming an engine of
 oppression in the hands of another, should fail; if they should
 give way to the maxims of commerce, to the refinements of a
 supposed philosophy, or to the misplaced ardours of a republican
 spirit; if they are betrayed by the cowardice of subjects, or
 subdued by the ambition of princes; what must become of the
 nations of Europe?
     Despotism is monarchy corrupted, in which a court and a
 prince in appearance remain, but in which every subordinate rank
 is destroyed; in which the subject is told, that he has no
 rights; that he cannot possess any property, nor fill any
 station, independent of the momentary will of his prince. These
 doctrines are founded on the maxims of conquest; they must be
 inculcated with the whip and the sword; and are best received
 under the terror of chains and imprisonment. Fear, therefore, is
 the principle which qualifies the subject to occupy his station:
 and the sovereign, who holds out the ensigns of terror so freely
 to others, has abundant reason to give this passion a principal
 place with himself. That tenure which he has devised for the
 rights of others, is soon applied to his own; and from his eager
 desire to secure, or to extend, his power, he finds it become,
 like the fortunes of his people, a creature of mere imagination
 and unsettled caprice.
     Whilst we thus, with so much accuracy, can assign the ideal
 limits that may distinguish constitutions of government, we find
 them, in reality, both in respect to the principle and the form,
 variously blended together. In what society are not men classed
 by external distinctions, as well as personal qualities? In what
 state are they not actuated by a variety of principles; justice,
 honour, moderation, and fear? It is the purpose of science, not
 to disguise this confusion in its object, but, in the
 multiplicity and combination of particulars, to find the
 principal points which deserve our attention, and which, being
 well understood, save us from the embarrassment which the
 varieties of singular cases might otherwise create. In the same
 degree in which governments require men to act from principles of
 virtue, of honour, or of fear, they are more or less fully
 comprised under the heads of republic, monarchy, or despotism,
 and the general theory is more or less applicable to their
 particular case.
     Forms of government, in fact, mutually approach or recede by
 many, and often insensible gradations. Democracy, by admitting
 certain inequalities of rank, approaches to aristocracy. In
 popular, as well as aristocratical governments, particular men,
 by their personal authority, and sometimes by the credit of their
 family, have maintained a species of monarchical power. The
 monarch is limited in different degrees: even the despotic prince
 is only that monarch whose subjects claim the fewest privileges,
 or who is himself best prepared to subdue them by force. All
 these varieties are but steps in the history of mankind, and mark
 the fleeting and transient situations through which they have
 passed, while supported by virtue, or depressed by vice.
     Perfect democracy and despotism appear to be the opposite
 extremes to which constitutions of government are sometimes
 carried. Under the first, a perfect virtue is required; under the
 second, a total corruption is supposed: yet in point of mere
 form, there being nothing fixed in the ranks and distinctions of
 men, beyond the casual and temporary possession of power,
 societies easily pass from a condition in which every individual
 has an equal title to reign, into one in which they are equally
 destined to serve. The same qualities in both, courage,
 popularity, address, and military conduct, raise the ambitious to
 eminence. With these qualities, the citizen or the slave easily
 passes from the ranks to the command of an army, from an obscure
 to an illustrious station. In either, a single person may rule
 with unlimited sway; and in both, the populace may break down
 every barrier of order, and restraint of law.
     If we suppose that the equality established among the
 subjects of a despotic state, has inspired its members with
 confidence, intrepidity, and the love of justice; the despotic
 prince, having ceased to be an object of fear, must sink among
 the croud. If, on the contrary, the personal equality which is
 enjoyed by the members of a democratical state, should be valued
 merely as an equal pretension to the objects of avarice and
 ambition, the monarch may start up anew, and be supported by
 those who mean to share in his profits. When the covetous and
 mercenary assemble in parties, it is of no consequence under what
 leader they inlist, whether Caesar or Pompey; the hopes of rapine
 or power are the only motives from which they become attached to
 either.
     In the disorder of corrupted societies, the scene has been
 frequently changed from democracy to despotism, and from the last
 too, in its turn, to the first. From amidst the democracy of
 corrupt men, and from a scene of lawless confusion, the tyrant
 ascends a throne with arms reeking in blood. But his abuses, or
 his weaknesses, in the station which he has gained, in their
 turn, awaken and give way to the spirit of mutiny and revenge.
 The cries of murder and desolation, which in the ordinary course
 of military government terrified the subject in his private
 retreat, are carried through the vaults, and made to pierce the
 grates and iron doors of the seraglio. Democracy seems to revive
 in a scene of wild disorder and tumult: but both the extremes are
 but the transient fits of paroxysm or languor in a distempered
 state.
     If men be any where arrived at this measure of depravity,
 there appears no immediate hope of redress. Neither the
 ascendency of the multitude, nor that of the tyrant, will secure
 the administration of justice: neither the licence of mere
 tumult, nor the calm of dejection and servitude, will teach the
 citizen that he was born for candour and affection to his
 fellow-creatures. And if the speculative would find that habitual
 state of war which they are sometimes pleased to honour with the
 name of the state of nature, they will find it in the contest
 that subsists between the despotical prince and his subjects, not
 in the first approaches of a rude and simple tribe to the
 condition and the domestic arrangement of nations.
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. Rousseau, sur l'origine de l'ingalit?parmi les hommes.
 
 2. Trait?de l'esprit.
 
 3. Lafitau, Moeurs des sauvages.
 
 4. Abulgaze Bhadur Chan, History of the Tartars.
 
 5. Collection of Dutch Voyages.
 
 6. Charlevoix, History of Canada.
 
 7. See Charlevoix's History of Canada.
 
 8. Mandeville.
 
 9. Mankind, we are told, are devoted to interest; and this, in
 all commercial nations, is undoubtedly true: but it does not
 follow, that they are, by their natural dispositions, averse to
 society and mutual affection: proofs of the contrary remain, even
 where interest triumphs most. What must we think of the force of
 that disposition to compassion, to candour, and goodwill, which,
 notwithstanding the prevailing opinion that the happiness of a
 man consists in possessing the greatest possible share of riches,
 preferments, and honours, still keeps the parties who are in
 competition for those objects, on a tolerable footing of amity,
 and leads them to abstain even from their own supposed good, when
 their seizing it appears in the light of a detriment to others?
 What might we not expect from the human heart in circumstance
 which prevented this apprehension on the subject of fortune, or
 under the influence of an opinion as steady and general as the
 former, that human felicity does not consist in the indulgences
 of animal appetite, but in those of a benevolent heart; not in
 fortune or interest, but in the contempt of this very object, in
 the courage and freedom which arise from this contempt, joined to
 a resolute choice of conduct, directed to the good of mankind, or
 to the good of that particular society to which the party
 belongs?
 
 10. Persian Letters.
 
 11. Maupertuis, Essai de Morale.
 
 12. Life of Lord Herbert.
 
 13. Letters of the Right Honourable Lady M--y W---y M---e.
 
 14. The same maxim will apply throughout every part of nature. To
 love, is to enjoy pleasures: To hate, is to be in pain.
 
 15. Mrs. Carter's translation of the works of Epictetus.
 
 