




Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part I.



     The Conquest Of Persia, Syria, Egypt, Africa, And Spain, By

The Arabs Or Saracens. - Empire Of The Caliphs, Or Successors Of

Mahomet. - State Of The Christians, &c., Under Their Government.



     The revolution of Arabia had not changed the character of

the Arabs: the death of Mahomet was the signal of independence;

and the hasty structure of his power and religion tottered to its

foundations.  A small and faithful band of his primitive

disciples had listened to his eloquence, and shared his distress;

had fled with the apostle from the persecution of Mecca, or had

received the fugitive in the walls of Medina.  The increasing

myriads, who acknowledged Mahomet as their king and prophet, had

been compelled by his arms, or allured by his prosperity.  The

polytheists were confounded by the simple idea of a solitary and

invisible God; the pride of the Christians and Jews disdained the

yoke of a mortal and contemporary legislator.  The habits of

faith and obedience were not sufficiently confirmed; and many of

the new converts regretted the venerable antiquity of the law of

Moses, or the rites and mysteries of the Catholic church; or the

idols, the sacrifices, the joyous festivals, of their Pagan

ancestors. The jarring interests and hereditary feuds of the

Arabian tribes had not yet coalesced in a system of union and

subordination; and the Barbarians were impatient of the mildest

and most salutary laws that curbed their passions, or violated

their customs.  They submitted with reluctance to the religious

precepts of the Koran, the abstinence from wine, the fast of the

Ramadan, and the daily repetition of five prayers; and the alms

and tithes, which were collected for the treasury of Medina,

could be distinguished only by a name from the payment of a

perpetual and ignominious tribute. The example of Mahomet had

excited a spirit of fanaticism or imposture, and several of his

rivals presumed to imitate the conduct, and defy the authority,

of the living prophet.  At the head of the fugitives and

auxiliaries, the first caliph was reduced to the cities of Mecca,

Medina, and Tayef; and perhaps the Koreish would have restored

the idols of the Caaba, if their levity had not been checked by a

seasonable reproof.  "Ye men of Mecca, will ye be the last to

embrace, and the first to abandon, the religion of Islam?" After

exhorting the Moslems to confide in the aid of God and his

apostle, Abubeker resolved, by a vigorous attack, to prevent the

junction of the rebels.  The women and children were safely

lodged in the cavities of the mountains: the warriors, marching

under eleven banners, diffused the terror of their arms; and the

appearance of a military force revived and confirmed the loyalty

of the faithful.  The inconstant tribes accepted, with humble

repentance, the duties of prayer, and fasting, and alms; and,

after some examples of success and severity, the most daring

apostates fell prostrate before the sword of the Lord and of

Caled.  In the fertile province of Yemanah, ^1 between the Red

Sea and the Gulf of Persia, in a city not inferior to Medina

itself, a powerful chief (his name was Moseilama) had assumed the

character of a prophet, and the tribe of Hanifa listened to his

voice.  A female prophetess ^* was attracted by his reputation;

the decencies of words and actions were spurned by these

favorites of Heaven; ^2 and they employed several days in mystic

and amorous converse.  An obscure sentence of his Koran, or book,

is yet extant; ^3 and in the pride of his mission, Moseilama

condescended to offer a partition of the earth.  The proposal was

answered by Mahomet with contempt; but the rapid progress of the

impostor awakened the fears of his successor: forty thousand

Moslems were assembled under the standard of Caled; and the

existence of their faith was resigned to the event of a decisive

battle. ^* In the first action they were repulsed by the loss of

twelve hundred men; but the skill and perseverance of their

general prevailed; their defeat was avenged by the slaughter of

ten thousand infidels; and Moseilama himself was pierced by an

Aethiopian slave with the same javelin which had mortally wounded

the uncle of Mahomet.  The various rebels of Arabia without a

chief or a cause, were speedily suppressed by the power and

discipline of the rising monarchy; and the whole nation again

professed, and more steadfastly held, the religion of the Koran. 

The ambition of the caliphs provided an immediate exercise for

the restless spirit of the Saracens: their valor was united in

the prosecution of a holy war; and their enthusiasm was equally

confirmed by opposition and victory. 

[Footnote 1: See the description of the city and country of Al

Yamanah, in Abulfeda, Descript.  Arabiae, p. 60, 61.  In the

xiiith century, there were some ruins, and a few palms; but in

the present century, the same ground is occupied by the visions

and arms of a modern prophet, whose tenets are imperfectly known,

(Niebuhr, Description de l'Arabie, p. 296 - 302.)] 

[Footnote *: This extraordinary woman was a Christian; she was at

the head of a numerous and flourishing sect; Moseilama professed

to recognize her inspiration.  In a personal interview he

proposed their marriage and the union of their sects.  The

handsome person, the impassioned eloquence, and the arts of

Moseilama, triumphed over the virtue of the prophetesa who was

rejected with scorn by her lover, and by her notorious unchastity

ost her influence with her own followers.  Gibbon, with that

propensity too common, especially in his later volumes, has

selected only the grosser part of this singular adventure. - M.]



[Footnote 2: The first salutation may be transcribed, but cannot

be translated.  It was thus that Moseilama said or sung: -



     Surge tandem itaque strenue permolenda; nam stratus tibi

thorus est.      Aut in propatulo tentorio si velis, aut in

abditiore cubiculo si malis;      Aut supinam te humi exporrectam

fustigabo, si velis, aut si malis manibus pedibusque nixam.

     Aut si velis ejus (Priapi) gemino triente aut si malis totus

veniam.      Imo, totus venito, O Apostole Dei, clamabat foemina.



Id ipsum, dicebat      Moseilama, mihi quoque suggessit Deus.



The prophetess Segjah, after the fall of her lover, returned to

idolatry; but under the reign of Moawiyah, she became a

Mussulman, and died at Bassora, (Abulfeda, Annal. vers. Reiske,

p. 63.)]



[Footnote 3: See this text, which demonstrates a God from the

work of generation, in Abulpharagius (Specimen Hist. Arabum, p.

13, and Dynast. p. 103) and Abulfeda, (Annal. p. 63.)]



[Footnote *: Compare a long account of this battle in Price, p.

42. - M.] 

     From the rapid conquests of the Saracens a presumption will

naturally arise, that the caliphs ^! commanded in person the

armies of the faithful, and sought the crown of martyrdom in the

foremost ranks of the battle.  The courage of Abubeker, ^4 Omar,

^5 and Othman, ^6 had indeed been tried in the persecution and

wars of the prophet; and the personal assurance of paradise must

have taught them to despise the pleasures and dangers of the

present world.  But they ascended the throne in a venerable or

mature age; and esteemed the domestic cares of religion and

justice the most important duties of a sovereign.  Except the

presence of Omar at the siege of Jerusalem, their longest

expeditions were the frequent pilgrimage from Medina to Mecca;

and they calmly received the tidings of victory as they prayed or

preached before the sepulchre of the prophet.  The austere and

frugal measure of their lives was the effect of virtue or habit,

and the pride of their simplicity insulted the vain magnificence

of the kings of the earth.  When Abubeker assumed the office of

caliph, he enjoined his daughter Ayesha to take a strict account

of his private patrimony, that it might be evident whether he

were enriched or impoverished by the service of the state.  He

thought himself entitled to a stipend of three pieces of gold,

with the sufficient maintenance of a single camel and a black

slave; but on the Friday of each week he distributed the residue

of his own and the public money, first to the most worthy, and

then to the most indigent, of the Moslems.  The remains of his

wealth, a coarse garment, and five pieces of gold, were delivered

to his successor, who lamented with a modest sigh his own

inability to equal such an admirable model.  Yet the abstinence

and humility of Omar were not inferior to the virtues of

Abubeker: his food consisted of barley bread or dates; his drink

was water; he preached in a gown that was torn or tattered in

twelve places; and the Persian satrap, who paid his homage to the

conqueror, found him asleep among the beggars on the steps of the

mosch of Medina.  Oeeconomy is the source of liberality, and the

increase of the revenue enabled Omar to establish a just and

perpetual reward for the past and present services of the

faithful.  Careless of his own emolument, he assigned to Abbas,

the uncle of the prophet, the first and most ample allowance of

twenty-five thousand drachms or pieces of silver.  Five thousand

were allotted to each of the aged warriors, the relics of the

field of Beder; and the last and meanest of the companions of

Mahomet was distinguished by the annual reward of three thousand

pieces.  One thousand was the stipend of the veterans who had

fought in the first battles against the Greeks and Persians; and

the decreasing pay, as low as fifty pieces of silver, was adapted

to the respective merit and seniority of the soldiers of Omar. 

Under his reign, and that of his predecessor, the conquerors of

the East were the trusty servants of God and the people; the mass

of the public treasure was consecrated to the expenses of peace

and war; a prudent mixture of justice and bounty maintained the

discipline of the Saracens, and they united, by a rare felicity,

the despatch and execution of despotism with the equal and frugal

maxims of a republican government.  The heroic courage of Ali, ^7

the consummate prudence of Moawiyah, ^8 excited the emulation of

their subjects; and the talents which had been exercised in the

school of civil discord were more usefully applied to propagate

the faith and dominion of the prophet.  In the sloth and vanity

of the palace of Damascus, the succeeding princes of the house of

Ommiyah were alike destitute of the qualifications of statesmen

and of saints. ^9 Yet the spoils of unknown nations were

continually laid at the foot of their throne, and the uniform

ascent of the Arabian greatness must be ascribed to the spirit of

the nation rather than the abilities of their chiefs.  A large

deduction must be allowed for the weakness of their enemies.  The

birth of Mahomet was fortunately placed in the most degenerate

and disorderly period of the Persians, the Romans, and the

Barbarians of Europe: the empires of Trajan, or even of

Constantine or Charlemagne, would have repelled the assault of

the naked Saracens, and the torrent of fanaticism might have been

obscurely lost in the sands of Arabia.



[Footnote !: In Arabic, "successors." V. Hammer Geschichte der

Assas. p. 14 - M.]



[Footnote 4: His reign in Eutychius, tom. ii. p. 251.  Elmacin,

p. 18. Abulpharagius, p. 108.  Abulfeda, p. 60.  D'Herbelot, p.

58.] 

[Footnote 5: His reign in Eutychius, p. 264.  Elmacin, p. 24.

Abulpharagius, p. 110.  Abulfeda, p. 66.  D'Herbelot, p. 686.]



[Footnote 6: His reign in Eutychius, p. 323.  Elmacin, p. 36.

Abulpharagius, p. 115.  Abulfeda, p. 75.  D'Herbelot, p. 695.]



[Footnote 7: His reign in Eutychius, p. 343.  Elmacin, p. 51.

Abulpharagius, p. 117.  Abulfeda, p. 83.  D'Herbelot, p. 89.]



[Footnote 8: His reign in Eutychius, p. 344.  Elmacin, p. 54.

Abulpharagius, p. 123.  Abulfeda, p. 101.  D'Herbelot, p. 586.]



[Footnote 9: Their reigns in Eutychius, tom. ii. p. 360 - 395. 

Elmacin, p. 59 - 108.  Abulpharagius, Dynast. ix. p. 124 - 139. 

Abulfeda, p. 111 - 141. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p.

691, and the particular articles of the Ommiades.]



     In the victorious days of the Roman republic, it had been

the aim of the senate to confine their councils and legions to a

single war, and completely to suppress a first enemy before they

provoked the hostilities of a second. These timid maxims of

policy were disdained by the magnanimity or enthusiasm of the

Arabian caliphs.  With the same vigor and success they invaded

the successors of Augustus and those of Artaxerxes; and the rival

monarchies at the same instant became the prey of an enemy whom

they had been so long accustomed to despise.  In the ten years of

the administration of Omar, the Saracens reduced to his obedience

thirty-six thousand cities or castles, destroyed four thousand

churches or temples of the unbelievers, and edified fourteen

hundred moschs for the exercise of the religion of Mahomet.  One

hundred years after his flight from Mecca, the arms and the reign

of his successors extended from India to the Atlantic Ocean, over

the various and distant provinces, which may be comprised under

the names of, I.  Persia; II. Syria; III.  Egypt; IV. Africa;

and, V.  Spain.  Under this general division, I shall proceed to

unfold these memorable transactions; despatching with brevity the

remote and less interesting conquests of the East, and reserving

a fuller narrative for those domestic countries which had been

included within the pale of the Roman empire.  Yet I must excuse

my own defects by a just complaint of the blindness and

insufficiency of my guides.  The Greeks, so loquacious in

controversy, have not been anxious to celebrate the triumphs of

their enemies. ^10 After a century of ignorance, the first annals

of the Mussulmans were collected in a great measure from the

voice of tradition. ^11 Among the numerous productions of Arabic

and Persian literature, ^12 our interpreters have selected the

imperfect sketches of a more recent age. ^13 The art and genius

of history have ever been unknown to the Asiatics; ^14 they are

ignorant of the laws of criticism; and our monkish chronicle of

the same period may be compared to their most popular works,

which are never vivified by the spirit of philosophy and freedom.



The Oriental library of a Frenchman ^15 would instruct the most

learned mufti of the East; and perhaps the Arabs might not find

in a single historian so clear and comprehensive a narrative of

their own exploits as that which will be deduced in the ensuing

sheets. 

[Footnote 10: For the viith and viiith century, we have scarcely

any original evidence of the Byzantine historians, except the

chronicles of Theophanes (Theophanis Confessoris Chronographia,

Gr. et Lat. cum notis Jacobi Goar. Paris, 1665, in folio) and the

Abridgment of Nicephorus, (Nicephori Patriarchae C. P. Breviarium

Historicum, Gr. et Lat. Paris, 1648, in folio,) who both lived in

the beginning of the ixth century, (see Hanckius de Scriptor.

Byzant. p. 200 - 246.) Their contemporary, Photius, does not seem

to be more opulent.  After praising the style of Nicephorus, he

adds, and only complains of his extreme brevity, (Phot. Bibliot.

Cod. lxvi. p. 100.) Some additions may be gleaned from the more

recent histories of Cedrenus and Zonaras of the xiith century.]



[Footnote 11: Tabari, or Al Tabari, a native of Taborestan, a

famous Imam of Bagdad, and the Livy of the Arabians, finished his

general history in the year of the Hegira 302, (A.D. 914.) At the

request of his friends, he reduced a work of 30,000 sheets to a

more reasonable size.  But his Arabic original is known only by

the Persian and Turkish versions.  The Saracenic history of Ebn

Amid, or Elmacin, is said to be an abridgment of the great

Tabari, (Ockley's Hist. of the Saracens, vol. ii. preface, p.

xxxix. and list of authors, D'Herbelot, p. 866, 870, 1014.)]



[Footnote 12: Besides the list of authors framed by Prideaux,

(Life of Mahomet, p. 179 - 189,) Ockley, (at the end of his

second volume,) and Petit de la Croix, (Hist. de Gengiscan, p.

525 - 550,) we find in the Bibliotheque Orientale Tarikh, a

catalogue of two or three hundred histories or chronicles of the

East, of which not more than three or four are older than Tabari.



A lively sketch of Oriental literature is given by Reiske, (in

his Prodidagmata ad Hagji Chalifae librum memorialem ad calcem

Abulfedae Tabulae Syriae, Lipsiae, 1776;) but his project and the

French version of Petit de la Croix (Hist. de Timur Bec, tom. i.

preface, p. xlv.) have fallen to the ground.] 

[Footnote 13: The particular historians and geographers will be

occasionally introduced.  The four following titles represent the

Annals which have guided me in this general narrative.  1.

Annales Eutychii, Patriarchoe Alexandrini, ab Edwardo Pocockio,

Oxon. 1656, 2 vols. in 4to. A pompous edition of an indifferent

author, translated by Pocock to gratify the Presbyterian

prejudices of his friend Selden.  2. Historia Saracenica Georgii

Elmacini, opera et studio Thomae Erpenii, in 4to., Lugd.

Batavorum, 1625.  He is said to have hastily translated a corrupt

Ms., and his version is often deficient in style and sense.  3.

Historia compendiosa Dynastiarum a Gregorio Abulpharagio,

interprete Edwardo Pocockio, in 4to., Oxon. 1663. More useful for

the literary than the civil history of the East.  4. Abulfedoe

Annales Moslemici ad Ann. Hegiroe ccccvi. a Jo. Jac. Reiske, in

4to., Lipsioe, 1754.  The best of our chronicles, both for the

original and version, yet how far below the name of Abulfeda!  We

know that he wrote at Hamah in the xivth century.  The three

former were Christians of the xth, xiith, and xiiith centuries;

the two first, natives of Egypt; a Melchite patriarch, and a

Jacobite scribe.] 

[Footnote 14: M. D. Guignes (Hist. des Huns, tom. i. pref. p.

xix. xx.) has characterized, with truth and knowledge, the two

sorts of Arabian historians - the dry annalist, and the tumid and

flowery orator.]



[Footnote 15: Bibliotheque Orientale, par M. D'Herbelot, in

folio, Paris, 1697.  For the character of the respectable author,

consult his friend Thevenot, (Voyages du Levant, part i. chap.

1.) His work is an agreeable miscellany, which must gratify every

taste; but I never can digest the alphabetical order; and I find

him more satisfactory in the Persian than the Arabic history. 

The recent supplement from the papers of Mm. Visdelou, and

Galland, (in folio, La Haye, 1779,) is of a different cast, a

medley of tales, proverbs, and Chinese antiquities.]



     I.  In the first year of the first caliph, his lieutenant

Caled, the Sword of God, and the scourge of the infidels,

advanced to the banks of the Euphrates, and reduced the cities of

Anbar and Hira.  Westward of the ruins of Babylon, a tribe of

sedentary Arabs had fixed themselves on the verge of the desert;

and Hira was the seat of a race of kings who had embraced the

Christian religion, and reigned above six hundred years under the

shadow of the throne of Persia. ^16 The last of the Mondars ^*

was defeated and slain by Caled; his son was sent a captive to

Medina; his nobles bowed before the successor of the prophet; the

people was tempted by the example and success of their

countrymen; and the caliph accepted as the first-fruits of

foreign conquest an annual tribute of seventy thousand pieces of

gold.  The conquerors, and even their historians, were astonished

by the dawn of their future greatness: "In the same year," says

Elmacin, "Caled fought many signal battles: an immense multitude

of the infidels was slaughtered; and spoils infinite and

innumerable were acquired by the victorious Moslems." ^17 But the

invincible Caled was soon transferred to the Syrian war: the

invasion of the Persian frontier was conducted by less active or

less prudent commanders: the Saracens were repulsed with loss in

the passage of the Euphrates; and, though they chastised the

insolent pursuit of the Magians, their remaining forces still

hovered in the desert of Babylon. ^!



[Footnote 16: Pocock will explain the chronology, (Specimen Hist.

Arabum, p. 66 - 74,) and D'Anville the geography, (l'Euphrate, et

le Tigre, p. 125,) of the dynasty of the Almondars.  The English

scholar understood more Arabic than the mufti of Aleppo, (Ockley,

vol. ii. p. 34: ) the French geographer is equally at home in

every age and every climate of the world.] 

[Footnote *: Eichhorn and Silvestre de Sacy have written on the

obscure history of the Mondars. - M.]



[Footnote 17: Fecit et Chaled plurima in hoc anno praelia, in

quibus vicerunt Muslimi, et infidelium immensa multitudine occisa

spolia infinita et innumera sunt nacti, (Hist. Saracenica, p.

20.) The Christian annalist slides into the national and

compendious term of infidels, and I often adopt (I hope without

scandal) this characteristic mode of expression.]



[Footnote !: Compare throughout Malcolm, vol. ii. p. 136. - M.] 

     The indignation and fears of the Persians suspended for a

moment their intestine divisions.  By the unanimous sentence of

the priests and nobles, their queen Arzema was deposed; the sixth

of the transient usurpers, who had arisen and vanished in three

or four years since the death of Chosroes, and the retreat of

Heraclius.  Her tiara was placed on the head of Yezdegerd, the

grandson of Chosroes; and the same aera, which coincides with an

astronomical period, ^18 has recorded the fall of the Sassanian

dynasty and the religion of Zoroaster. ^19 The youth and

inexperience of the prince (he was only fifteen years of age)

declined a perilous encounter: the royal standard was delivered

into the hands of his general Rustam; and a remnant of thirty

thousand regular troops was swelled in truth, or in opinion, to

one hundred and twenty thousand subjects, or allies, of the great

king.  The Moslems, whose numbers were reenforced from twelve to

thirty thousand, had pitched their camp in the plains of Cadesia:

^20 and their line, though it consisted of fewer men, could

produce more soldiers, than the unwieldy host of the infidels.  I

shall here observe, what I must often repeat, that the charge of

the Arabs was not, like that of the Greeks and Romans, the effort

of a firm and compact infantry: their military force was chiefly

formed of cavalry and archers; and the engagement, which was

often interrupted and often renewed by single combats and flying

skirmishes, might be protracted without any decisive event to the

continuance of several days.  The periods of the battle of

Cadesia were distinguished by their peculiar appellations.  The

first, from the well- timed appearance of six thousand of the

Syrian brethren, was denominated the day of succor.  The day of

concussion might express the disorder of one, or perhaps of both,

of the contending armies.  The third, a nocturnal tumult,

received the whimsical name of the night of barking, from the

discordant clamors, which were compared to the inarticulate

sounds of the fiercest animals.  The morning of the succeeding

day ^* determined the fate of Persia; and a seasonable whirlwind

drove a cloud of dust against the faces of the unbelievers.  The

clangor of arms was reechoed to the tent of Rustam, who, far

unlike the ancient hero of his name, was gently reclining in a

cool and tranquil shade, amidst the baggage of his camp, and the

train of mules that were laden with gold and silver.  On the

sound of danger he started from his couch; but his flight was

overtaken by a valiant Arab, who caught him by the foot, struck

off his head, hoisted it on a lance, and instantly returning to

the field of battle, carried slaughter and dismay among the

thickest ranks of the Persians. The Saracens confess a loss of

seven thousand five hundred men; ^! and the battle of Cadesia is

justly described by the epithets of obstinate and atrocious. ^21

The standard of the monarchy was overthrown and captured in the

field - a leathern apron of a blacksmith, who in ancient times

had arisen the deliverer of Persia; but this badge of heroic

poverty was disguised, and almost concealed, by a profusion of

precious gems. ^22 After this victory, the wealthy province of

Irak, or Assyria, submitted to the caliph, and his conquests were

firmly established by the speedy foundation of Bassora, ^23 a

place which ever commands the trade and navigation of the

Persians.  As the distance of fourscore miles from the Gulf, the

Euphrates and Tigris unite in a broad and direct current, which

is aptly styled the river of the Arabs.  In the midway, between

the junction and the mouth of these famous streams, the new

settlement was planted on the western bank: the first colony was

composed of eight hundred Moslems; but the influence of the

situation soon reared a flourishing and populous capital.  The

air, though excessively hot, is pure and healthy: the meadows are

filled with palm- trees and cattle; and one of the adjacent

valleys has been celebrated among the four paradises or gardens

of Asia.  Under the first caliphs the jurisdiction of this

Arabian colony extended over the southern provinces of Persia:

the city has been sanctified by the tombs of the companions and

martyrs; and the vessels of Europe still frequent the port of

Bassora, as a convenient station and passage of the Indian trade.



[Footnote 18: A cycle of 120 years, the end of which an

intercalary month of 30 days supplied the use of our Bissextile,

and restored the integrity of the solar year.  In a great

revolution of 1440 years this intercalation was successively

removed from the first to the twelfth month; but Hyde and Freret

are involved in a profound controversy, whether the twelve, or

only eight of these changes were accomplished before the aera of

Yezdegerd, which is unanimously fixed to the 16th of June, A.D.

632.  How laboriously does the curious spirit of Europe explore

the darkest and most distant antiquities! (Hyde de Religione

Persarum, c. 14 - 18, p. 181 - 211. Freret in the Mem. de

l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xvi. p. 233 - 267.)]



[Footnote 19: Nine days after the death of Mahomet (7th June,

A.D. 632) we find the aera of Yezdegerd, (16th June, A.D. 632,)

and his accession cannot be postponed beyond the end of the first

year.  His predecessors could not therefore resist the arms of

the caliph Omar; and these unquestionable dates overthrow the

thoughtless chronology of Abulpharagius.  See Ockley's Hist. of

the Saracens, vol. i. p. 130.



     Note: The Rezont Uzzuffa (Price, p. 105) has a strange

account of an embassy to Yezdegerd.  The Oriental historians take

great delight in these embassies, which give them an opportunity

of displaying their Asiatic eloquence - M.]



[Footnote 20: Cadesia, says the Nubian geographer, (p. 121,) is

in margine solitudinis, 61 leagues from Bagdad, and two stations

from Cufa.  Otter (Voyage, tom. i. p. 163) reckons 15 leagues,

and observes, that the place is supplied with dates and water.]



[Footnote *: The day of cormorants, or according to another

reading the day of reinforcements.  It was the night which was

called the night of snarling. Price, p. 114. - M.]



[Footnote !: According to Malcolm's authorities, only three

thousand; but he adds "This is the report of Mahomedan

historians, who have a great disposition of the wonderful, in

relating the first actions of the faithful" Vol. i. p. 39. - M.]



[Footnote 21: Atrox, contumax, plus semel renovatum, are the

well-chosen expressions of the translator of Abulfeda, (Reiske,

p. 69.)] 

[Footnote 22: D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 297, 348.] 

[Footnote 23: The reader may satisfy himself on the subject of

Bassora by consulting the following writers: Geograph, Nubiens.

p. 121.  D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 192.  D'Anville,

l'Euphrate et le Tigre, p. 130, 133, 145.  Raynal, Hist.

Philosophique des deux Indes, tom. ii. p. 92 - 100. Voyages di

Pietro della Valle, tom. iv. p. 370 - 391.  De Tavernier, tom. i.

p. 240 - 247.  De Thevenot, tom. ii. p. 545 - 584.  D Otter, tom.

ii. p. 45 - 78.  De Niebuhr, tom. ii. p. 172 - 199.]





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part II.



     After the defeat of Cadesia, a country intersected by rivers

and canals might have opposed an insuperable barrier to the

victorious cavalry; and the walls of Ctesiphon or Madayn, which

had resisted the battering-rams of the Romans, would not have

yielded to the darts of the Saracens.  But the flying Persians

were overcome by the belief, that the last day of their religion

and empire was at hand; the strongest posts were abandoned by

treachery or cowardice; and the king, with a part of his family

and treasures, escaped to Holwan at the foot of the Median hills.



In the third month after the battle, Said, the lieutenant of

Omar, passed the Tigris without opposition; the capital was taken

by assault; and the disorderly resistance of the people gave a

keener edge to the sabres of the Moslems, who shouted with

religious transport, "This is the white palace of Chosroes; this

is the promise of the apostle of God!" The naked robbers of the

desert were suddenly enriched beyond the measure of their hope or

knowledge.  Each chamber revealed a new treasure secreted with

art, or ostentatiously displayed; the gold and silver, the

various wardrobes and precious furniture, surpassed (says

Abulfeda) the estimate of fancy or numbers; and another historian

defines the untold and almost infinite mass, by the fabulous

computation of three thousands of thousands of thousands of

pieces of gold. ^24 Some minute though curious facts represent

the contrast of riches and ignorance.  From the remote islands of

the Indian Ocean a large provision of camphire ^25 had been

imported, which is employed with a mixture of wax to illuminate

the palaces of the East. Strangers to the name and properties of

that odoriferous gum, the Saracens, mistaking it for salt,

mingled the camphire in their bread, and were astonished at the

bitterness of the taste.  One of the apartments of the palace was

decorated with a carpet of silk, sixty cubits in length, and as

many in breadth: a paradise or garden was depictured on the

ground: the flowers, fruits, and shrubs, were imitated by the

figures of the gold embroidery, and the colors of the precious

stones; and the ample square was encircled by a variegated and

verdant border. ^! The Arabian general persuaded his soldiers to

relinquish their claim, in the reasonable hope that the eyes of

the caliph would be delighted with the splendid workmanship of

nature and industry. Regardless of the merit of art, and the pomp

of royalty, the rigid Omar divided the prize among his brethren

of Medina: the picture was destroyed; but such was the intrinsic

value of the materials, that the share of Ali alone was sold for

twenty thousand drams.  A mule that carried away the tiara and

cuirass, the belt and bracelets of Chosroes, was overtaken by the

pursuers; the gorgeous trophy was presented to the commander of

the faithful; and the gravest of the companions condescended to

smile when they beheld the white beard, the hairy arms, and

uncouth figure of the veteran, who was invested with the spoils

of the Great King. ^26 The sack of Ctesiphon was followed by its

desertion and gradual decay.  The Saracens disliked the air and

situation of the place, and Omar was advised by his general to

remove the seat of government to the western side of the

Euphrates.  In every age, the foundation and ruin of the Assyrian

cities has been easy and rapid: the country is destitute of stone

and timber; and the most solid structures ^27 are composed of

bricks baked in the sun, and joined by a cement of the native

bitumen.  The name of Cufa ^28 describes a habitation of reeds

and earth; but the importance of the new capital was supported by

the numbers, wealth, and spirit, of a colony of veterans; and

their licentiousness was indulged by the wisest caliphs, who were

apprehensive of provoking the revolt of a hundred thousand

swords: "Ye men of Cufa," said Ali, who solicited their aid, "you

have been always conspicuous by your valor.  You conquered the

Persian king, and scattered his forces, till you had taken

possession of his inheritance." This mighty conquest was achieved

by the battles of Jalula and Nehavend. After the loss of the

former, Yezdegerd fled from Holwan, and concealed his shame and

despair in the mountains of Farsistan, from whence Cyrus had

descended with his equal and valiant companions.  The courage of

the nation survived that of the monarch: among the hills to the

south of Ecbatana or Hamadan, one hundred and fifty thousand

Persians made a third and final stand for their religion and

country; and the decisive battle of Nehavend was styled by the

Arabs the victory of victories.  If it be true that the flying

general of the Persians was stopped and overtaken in a crowd of

mules and camels laden with honey, the incident, however slight

and singular, will denote the luxurious impediments of an

Oriental army. ^29



[Footnote 24: Mente vix potest numerove comprehendi quanta spolia

nostris cesserint.  Abulfeda, p. 69.  Yet I still suspect, that

the extravagant numbers of Elmacin may be the error, not of the

text, but of the version. The best translators from the Greek,

for instance, I find to be very poor arithmeticians.



     Note: Ockley (Hist. of Saracens, vol. i. p. 230) translates

in the same manner three thousand million of ducats.  See

Forster's Mahometanism Unveiled, vol. ii. p. 462; who makes this

innocent doubt of Gibbon, in which, is to the amount of the

plunder, I venture to concur, a grave charge of inaccuracy and

disrespect to the memory of Erpenius.



     The Persian authorities of Price (p. 122) make the booty

worth three hundred and thirty millions sterling! - M]



[Footnote 25: The camphire-tree grows in China and Japan; but

many hundred weight of those meaner sorts are exchanged for a

single pound of the more precious gum of Borneo and Sumatra,

(Raynal, Hist. Philosoph. tom. i. p. 362 - 365.  Dictionnaire

d'Hist. Naturelle par Bomare Miller's Gardener's Dictionary.)

These may be the islands of the first climate from whence the

Arabians imported their camphire (Geograph. Nub. p. 34, 35. 

D'Herbelot, p. 232.)]



[Footnote !: Compare Price, p. 122. - M.]



[Footnote 26: See Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, tom. i. p. 376, 377. 

I may credit the fact, without believing the prophecy.]



[Footnote 27: The most considerable ruins of Assyria are the

tower of Belus, at Babylon, and the hall of Chosroes, at

Ctesiphon: they have been visited by that vain and curious

traveller Pietro della Valle, (tom. i. p. 713 - 718, 731 - 735.)



     Note: The best modern account is that of Claudius Rich Esq.

Two Memoirs of Babylon.  London, 1818. - M.]



[Footnote 28: Consult the article of Coufah in the Bibliotheque

of D'Herbelot ( p. 277, 278,) and the second volume of Ockley's

History, particularly p. 40 and 153.]



[Footnote 29: See the article of Nehavend, in D'Herbelot, p. 667,

668; and Voyages en Turquie et en Perse, par Otter, tom. i. 191.



     Note: Malcolm vol. i. p. 141. - M.]



     The geography of Persia is darkly delineated by the Greeks

and Latins; but the most illustrious of her cities appear to be

more ancient than the invasion of the Arabs.  By the reduction of

Hamadan and Ispahan, of Caswin, Tauris, and Rei, they gradually

approached the shores of the Caspian Sea: and the orators of

Mecca might applaud the success and spirit of the faithful, who

had already lost sight of the northern bear, and had almost

transcended the bounds of the habitable world. ^30 Again, turning

towards the West and the Roman empire, they repassed the Tigris

over the bridge of Mosul, and, in the captive provinces of

Armenia and Mesopotamia, embraced their victorious brethren of

the Syrian army.  From the palace of Madayn their Eastern

progress was not less rapid or extensive.  They advanced along

the Tigris and the Gulf; penetrated through the passes of the

mountains into the valley of Estachar or Persepolis, and profaned

the last sanctuary of the Magian empire.  The grandson of

Chosroes was nearly surprised among the falling columns and

mutilated figures; a sad emblem of the past and present fortune

of Persia: ^31 he fled with accelerated haste over the desert of

Kirman, implored the aid of the warlike Segestans, and sought an

humble refuge on the verge of the Turkish and Chinese power.  But

a victorious army is insensible of fatigue: the Arabs divided

their forces in the pursuit of a timorous enemy; and the caliph

Othman promised the government of Chorasan to the first general

who should enter that large and populous country, the kingdom of

the ancient Bactrians.  The condition was accepted; the prize was

deserved; the standard of Mahomet was planted on the walls of

Herat, Merou, and Balch; and the successful leader neither halted

nor reposed till his foaming cavalry had tasted the waters of the

Oxus.  In the public anarchy, the independent governors of the

cities and castles obtained their separate capitulations: the

terms were granted or imposed by the esteem, the prudence, or the

compassion, of the victors; and a simple profession of faith

established the distinction between a brother and a slave.  After

a noble defence, Harmozan, the prince or satrap of Ahwaz and

Susa, was compelled to surrender his person and his state to the

discretion of the caliph; and their interview exhibits a portrait

of the Arabian manners. In the presence, and by the command, of

Omar, the gay Barbarian was despoiled of his silken robes

embroidered with gold, and of his tiara bedecked with rubies and

emeralds: "Are you now sensible," said the conqueror to his naked

captive - "are you now sensible of the judgment of God, and of

the different rewards of infidelity and obedience?" "Alas!"

replied Harmozan, "I feel them too deeply.  In the days of our

common ignorance, we fought with the weapons of the flesh, and my

nation was superior.  God was then neuter: since he has espoused

your quarrel, you have subverted our kingdom and religion."

Oppressed by this painful dialogue, the Persian complained of

intolerable thirst, but discovered some apprehension lest he

should be killed whilst he was drinking a cup of water.  "Be of

good courage," said the caliph; "your life is safe till you have

drunk this water: " the crafty satrap accepted the assurance, and

instantly dashed the vase against the ground.  Omar would have

avenged the deceit, but his companions represented the sanctity

of an oath; and the speedy conversion of Harmozan entitled him

not only to a free pardon, but even to a stipend of two thousand

pieces of gold.  The administration of Persia was regulated by an

actual survey of the people, the cattle, and the fruits of the

earth; ^32 and this monument, which attests the vigilance of the

caliphs, might have instructed the philosophers of every age. ^33



[Footnote 30: It is in such a style of ignorance and wonder that

the Athenian orator describes the Arctic conquests of Alexander,

who never advanced beyond the shores of the Caspian.  Aeschines

contra Ctesiphontem, tom. iii. p. 554, edit.  Graec. Orator.

Reiske.  This memorable cause was pleaded at Athens, Olymp. cxii.

3, (before Christ 330,) in the autumn, (Taylor, praefat. p. 370,

&c.,) about a year after the battle of Arbela; and Alexander, in

the pursuit of Darius, was marching towards Hyrcania and

Bactriana.]



[Footnote 31: We are indebted for this curious particular to the

Dynasties of Abulpharagius, p. 116; but it is needless to prove

the identity of Estachar and Persepolis, (D'Herbelot, p. 327;)

and still more needless to copy the drawings and descriptions of

Sir John Chardin, or Corneillo le Bruyn.] 

[Footnote 32: After the conquest of Persia, Theophanes adds,

(Chronograph p. 283.]



[Footnote 33: Amidst our meagre relations, I must regret that

D'Herbelot has not found and used a Persian translation of

Tabari, enriched, as he says, with many extracts from the native

historians of the Ghebers or Magi, (Bibliotheque Orientale, p.

1014.)]



     The flight of Yezdegerd had carried him beyond the Oxus, and

as far as the Jaxartes, two rivers ^34 of ancient and modern

renown, which descend from the mountains of India towards the

Caspian Sea.  He was hospitably entertained by Takhan, prince of

Fargana, ^35 a fertile province on the Jaxartes: the king of

Samarcand, with the Turkish tribes of Sogdiana and Scythia, were

moved by the lamentations and promises of the fallen monarch; and

he solicited, by a suppliant embassy, the more solid and powerful

friendship of the emperor of China. ^36 The virtuous Taitsong,

^37 the first of the dynasty of the Tang may be justly compared

with the Antonines of Rome: his people enjoyed the blessings of

prosperity and peace; and his dominion was acknowledged by

forty-four hordes of the Barbarians of Tartary.  His last

garrisons of Cashgar and Khoten maintained a frequent intercourse

with their neighbors of the Jaxartes and Oxus; a recent colony of

Persians had introduced into China the astronomy of the Magi; and

Taitsong might be alarmed by the rapid progress and dangerous

vicinity of the Arabs.  The influence, and perhaps the supplies,

of China revived the hopes of Yezdegerd and the zeal of the

worshippers of fire; and he returned with an army of Turks to

conquer the inheritance of his fathers.  The fortunate Moslems,

without unsheathing their swords, were the spectators of his ruin

and death.  The grandson of Chosroes was betrayed by his servant,

insulted by the seditious inhabitants of Merou, and oppressed,

defeated, and pursued by his Barbarian allies.  He reached the

banks of a river, and offered his rings and bracelets for an

instant passage in a miller's boat. Ignorant or insensible of

royal distress, the rustic replied, that four drams of silver

were the daily profit of his mill, and that he would not suspend

his work unless the loss were repaid.  In this moment of

hesitation and delay, the last of the Sassanian kings was

overtaken and slaughtered by the Turkish cavalry, in the

nineteenth year of his unhappy reign. ^38 ^* His son Firuz, an

humble client of the Chinese emperor, accepted the station of

captain of his guards; and the Magian worship was long preserved

by a colony of loyal exiles in the province of Bucharia. ^! His

grandson inherited the regal name; but after a faint and

fruitless enterprise, he returned to China, and ended his days in

the palace of Sigan.  The male line of the Sassanides was

extinct; but the female captives, the daughters of Persia, were

given to the conquerors in servitude, or marriage; and the race

of the caliphs and imams was ennobled by the blood of their royal

mothers. ^39 

[Footnote 34: The most authentic accounts of the two rivers, the

Sihon (Jaxartes) and the Gihon, (Oxus,) may be found in Sherif al

Edrisi (Geograph. Nubiens. p. 138,) Abulfeda, (Descript.

Chorasan. in Hudson, tom. iii. p. 23,) Abulghazi Khan, who

reigned on their banks, (Hist. Genealogique des Tatars, p. 32,

57, 766,) and the Turkish Geographer, a MS. in the king of

France's library, (Examen Critique des Historiens d'Alexandre, p.

194 - 360.)] 

[Footnote 35: The territory of Fergana is described by Abulfeda,

p. 76, 77.] 

[Footnote 36: Eo redegit angustiarum eundem regem exsulem, ut

Turcici regis, et Sogdiani, et Sinensis, auxilia missis literis

imploraret, (Abulfed. Annal. p. 74) The connection of the Persian

and Chinese history is illustrated by Freret (Mem. de l'Academie,

tom. xvi. p. 245 - 255) and De Guignes, (Hist. des Huns, tom. i.

p. 54 - 59,) and for the geography of the borders, tom. ii. p. 1

- 43.]



[Footnote 37: Hist. Sinica, p. 41 - 46, in the iiid part of the

Relations Curieuses of Thevenot.]



[Footnote 38: I have endeavored to harmonize the various

narratives of Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen. p. 37,) Abulpharagius,

(Dynast. p. 116,) Abulfeda, (Annal. p. 74, 79,) and D'Herbelot,

(p. 485.) The end of Yezdegerd, was not only unfortunate but

obscure.]



[Footnote *: The account of Yezdegerd's death in the Habeib

'usseyr and Rouzut uzzuffa (Price, p. 162) is much more probable.



On the demand of the few dhirems, he offered to the miller his

sword, and royal girdle, of inesturable value.  This awoke the

cupidity of the miller, who murdered him, and threw the body into

the stream. - M.]



[Footnote !: Firouz died leaving a son called Ni-ni-cha by the

Chinese, probably Narses.  Yezdegerd had two sons, Firouz and

Bahram St. Martin, vol. xi. p. 318. - M.]



[Footnote 39: The two daughters of Yezdegerd married Hassan, the

son of Ali, and Mohammed, the son of Abubeker; and the first of

these was the father of a numerous progeny.  The daughter of

Phirouz became the wife of the caliph Walid, and their son Yezid

derived his genuine or fabulous descent from the Chosroes of

Persia, the Caesars of Rome, and the Chagans of the Turks or

Avars, (D'Herbelot, Bibliot.  Orientale, p. 96, 487.)]



     After the fall of the Persian kingdom, the River Oxus

divided the territories of the Saracens and of the Turks.  This

narrow boundary was soon overleaped by the spirit of the Arabs;

the governors of Chorasan extended their successive inroads; and

one of their triumphs was adorned with the buskin of a Turkish

queen, which she dropped in her precipitate flight beyond the

hills of Bochara. ^40 But the final conquest of Transoxiana, ^41

as well as of Spain, was reserved for the glorious reign of the

inactive Walid; and the name of Catibah, the camel driver,

declares the origin and merit of his successful lieutenant. 

While one of his colleagues displayed the first Mahometan banner

on the banks of the Indus, the spacious regions between the Oxus,

the Jaxartes, and the Caspian Sea, were reduced by the arms of

Catibah to the obedience of the prophet and of the caliph. ^42 A

tribute of two millions of pieces of gold was imposed on the

infidels; their idols were burnt or broken; the Mussulman chief

pronounced a sermon in the new mosch of Carizme; after several

battles, the Turkish hordes were driven back to the desert; and

the emperors of China solicited the friendship of the victorious

Arabs.  To their industry, the prosperity of the province, the

Sogdiana of the ancients, may in a great measure be ascribed; but

the advantages of the soil and climate had been understood and

cultivated since the reign of the Macedonian kings.  Before the

invasion of the Saracens, Carizme, Bochara, and Samarcand were

rich and populous under the yoke of the shepherds of the north.

^* These cities were surrounded with a double wall; and the

exterior fortification, of a larger circumference, enclosed the

fields and gardens of the adjacent district. The mutual wants of

India and Europe were supplied by the diligence of the Sogdian

merchants; and the inestimable art of transforming linen into

paper has been diffused from the manufacture of Samarcand over

the western world. ^43



[Footnote 40: It was valued at 2000 pieces of gold, and was the

prize of Obeidollah, the son of Ziyad, a name afterwards infamous

by the murder of Hosein, (Ockley's History of the Saracens, vol.

ii. p. 142, 143,) His brother Salem was accompanied by his wife,

the first Arabian woman (A.D. 680) who passed the Oxus: she

borrowed, or rather stole, the crown and jewels of the princess

of the Sogdians, (p. 231, 232.)]



[Footnote 41: A part of Abulfeda's geography is translated by

Greaves, inserted in Hudson's collection of the minor

geographers, (tom. iii.,) and entitled Descriptio Chorasmiae et

Mawaralnahroe, id est, regionum extra fluvium, Oxum, p. 80.  The

name of Transoxiana, softer in sound, equivalent in sense, is

aptly used by Petit de la Croix, (Hist. de Gengiscan, &c.,) and

some modern Orientalists, but they are mistaken in ascribing it

to the writers of antiquity.]



[Footnote 42: The conquests of Catibah are faintly marked by

Elmacin, (Hist. Saracen. p. 84,) D'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient.

Catbah, Samarcand Valid.,) and De Guignes, (Hist. des Huns, tom.

i. p. 58, 59.)]



[Footnote *: The manuscripts Arabian and Persian writers in the

royal library contain very circumstantial details on the contest

between the Persians and Arabians.  M. St. Martin declined this

addition to the work of Le Beau, as extending to too great a

length.  St. Martin vol. xi. p. 320. - M.] 

[Footnote 43: A curious description of Samarcand is inserted in

the Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, tom. i. p. 208, &c.  The

librarian Casiri (tom. ii. 9) relates, from credible testimony,

that paper was first imported from China to Samarcand, A. H. 30,

and invented, or rather introduced, at Mecca, A. H. 88.  The

Escurial library contains paper Mss. as old as the ivth or vth

century of the Hegira.]



     II.  No sooner had Abubeker restored the unity of faith and

government, than he despatched a circular letter to the Arabian

tribes. "In the name of the most merciful God, to the rest of the

true believers. Health and happiness, and the mercy and blessing

of God, be upon you.  I praise the most high God, and I pray for

his prophet Mahomet.  This is to acquaint you, that I intend to

send the true believers into Syria ^44 to take it out of the

hands of the infidels.  And I would have you know, that the

fighting for religion is an act of obedience to God." His

messengers returned with the tidings of pious and martial ardor

which they had kindled in every province; and the camp of Medina

was successively filled with the intrepid bands of the Saracens,

who panted for action, complained of the heat of the season and

the scarcity of provisions, and accused with impatient murmurs

the delays of the caliph.  As soon as their numbers were

complete, Abubeker ascended the hill, reviewed the men, the

horses, and the arms, and poured forth a fervent prayer for the

success of their undertaking.  In person, and on foot, he

accompanied the first day's march; and when the blushing leaders

attempted to dismount, the caliph removed their scruples by a

declaration, that those who rode, and those who walked, in the

service of religion, were equally meritorious.  His instructions

^45 to the chiefs of the Syrian army were inspired by the warlike

fanaticism which advances to seize, and affects to despise, the

objects of earthly ambition.  "Remember," said the successor of

the prophet, "that you are always in the presence of God, on the

verge of death, in the assurance of judgment, and the hope of

paradise.  Avoid injustice and oppression; consult with your

brethren, and study to preserve the love and confidence of your

troops.  When you fight the battles of the Lord, acquit

yourselves like men, without turning your backs; but let not your

victory be stained with the blood of women or children.  Destroy

no palm-trees, nor burn any fields of corn. Cut down no

fruit-trees, nor do any mischief to cattle, only such as you kill

to eat.  When you make any covenant or article, stand to it, and

be as good as your word.  As you go on, you will find some

religious persons who live retired in monasteries, and propose to

themselves to serve God that way: let them alone, and neither

kill them nor destroy their monasteries: ^46 And you will find

another sort of people, that belong to the synagogue of Satan,

who have shaven crowns; ^47 be sure you cleave their skulls, and

give them no quarter till they either turn Mahometans or pay

"tribute." All profane or frivolous conversation, all dangerous

recollection of ancient quarrels, was severely prohibited among

the Arabs: in the tumult of a camp, the exercises of religion

were assiduously practised; and the intervals of action were

employed in prayer, meditation, and the study of the Koran.  The

abuse, or even the use, of wine was chastised by fourscore

strokes on the soles of the feet, and in the fervor of their

primitive zeal, many secret sinners revealed their fault, and

solicited their punishment.  After some hesitation, the command

of the Syrian army was delegated to Abu Obeidah, one of the

fugitives of Mecca, and companions of Mahomet; whose zeal and

devotion was assuaged, without being abated, by the singular

mildness and benevolence of his temper.  But in all the

emergencies of war, the soldiers demanded the superior genius of

Caled; and whoever might be the choice of the prince, the Sword

of God was both in fact and fame the foremost leader of the

Saracens.  He obeyed without reluctance; ^* he was consulted

without jealousy; and such was the spirit of the man, or rather

of the times, that Caled professed his readiness to serve under

the banner of the faith, though it were in the hands of a child

or an enemy.  Glory, and riches, and dominion, were indeed

promised to the victorious Mussulman; but he was carefully

instructed, that if the goods of this life were his only

incitement, they likewise would be his only reward. 

[Footnote 44: A separate history of the conquest of Syria has

been composed by Al Wakidi, cadi of Bagdad, who was born A.D.

748, and died A.D. 822; he likewise wrote the conquest of Egypt,

of Diarbekir, &c.  Above the meagre and recent chronicles of the

Arabians, Al Wakidi has the double merit of antiquity and

copiousness.  His tales and traditions afford an artless picture

of the men and the times.  Yet his narrative is too often

defective, trifling, and improbable.  Till something better shall

be found, his learned and spiritual interpreter (Ockley, in his

History of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 21 - 342) will not deserve

the petulant animadversion of Reiske, (Prodidagmata ad Magji

Chalifae Tabulas, p. 236.) I am sorry to think that the labors of

Ockley were consummated in a jail, (see his two prefaces to the

1st A.D. 1708, to the 2d, 1718, with the list of authors at the

end.)



     Note: M. Hamaker has clearly shown that neither of these

works can be inscribed to Al Wakidi: they are not older than the

end of the xith century or later than the middle of the xivth. 

Praefat. in Inc. Auct. LIb. de Expugnatione Memphidis, c. ix. x.

- M.]



[Footnote 45: The instructions, &c., of the Syrian war are

described by Al Wakidi and Ockley, tom. i. p. 22 - 27, &c.  In

the sequel it is necessary to contract, and needless to quote,

their circumstantial narrative.  My obligations to others shall

be noticed.]



[Footnote 46: Notwithstanding this precept, M. Pauw (Recherches

sur les Egyptiens, tom. ii. p. 192, edit. Lausanne) represents

the Bedoweens as the implacable enemies of the Christian monks. 

For my own part, I am more inclined to suspect the avarice of the

Arabian robbers, and the prejudices of the German philosopher.



     Note: Several modern travellers (Mr. Fazakerley, in

Walpole's Travels in the East, vol. xi. 371) give very amusing

accounts of the terms on which the monks of Mount Sinai live with

the neighboring Bedoweens. Such, probably, was their relative

state in older times, wherever the Arab retained his Bedoween

habits. - M.]



[Footnote 47: Even in the seventh century, the monks were

generally laymen: 'hey wore their hair long and dishevelled, and

shaved their heads when they were ordained priests.  The circular

tonsure was sacred and mysterious; it was the crown of thorns;

but it was likewise a royal diadem, and every priest was a king,

&c., (Thomassin, Discipline de l'Eglise, tom. i. p. 721 - 758,

especially p. 737, 738.)]



[Footnote *: Compare Price, p. 90. - M.]





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.







Part IV.



     Another expedition of the conquerors of Damascus will

equally display their avidity and their contempt for the riches

of the present world.  They were informed that the produce and

manufactures of the country were annually collected in the fair

of Abyla, ^64 about thirty miles from the city; that the cell of

a devout hermit was visited at the same time by a multitude of

pilgrims; and that the festival of trade and superstition would

be ennobled by the nuptials of the daughter of the governor of

Tripoli.  Abdallah, the son of Jaafar, a glorious and holy

martyr, undertook, with a banner of five hundred horse, the pious

and profitable commission of despoiling the infidels.  As he

approached the fair of Abyla, he was astonished by the report of

this mighty concourse of Jews and Christians, Greeks, and

Armenians, of natives of Syria and of strangers of Egypt, to the

number of ten thousand, besides a guard of five thousand horse

that attended the person of the bride.  The Saracens paused: "For

my own part," said Abdallah, "I dare not go back: our foes are

many, our danger is great, but our reward is splendid and secure,

either in this life or in the life to come.  Let every man,

according to his inclination, advance or retire." Not a Mussulman

deserted his standard.  "Lead the way," said Abdallah to his

Christian guide, "and you shall see what the companions of the

prophet can perform." They charged in five squadrons; but after

the first advantage of the surprise, they were encompassed and

almost overwhelmed by the multitude of their enemies; and their

valiant band is fancifully compared to a white spot in the skin

of a black camel. ^65 About the hour of sunset, when their

weapons dropped from their hands, when they panted on the verge

of eternity, they discovered an approaching cloud of dust; they

heard the welcome sound of the tecbir, ^66 and they soon

perceived the standard of Caled, who flew to their relief with

the utmost speed of his cavalry.  The Christians were broken by

his attack, and slaughtered in their flight, as far as the river

of Tripoli.  They left behind them the various riches of the

fair; the merchandises that were exposed for sale, the money that

was brought for purchase, the gay decorations of the nuptials,

and the governor's daughter, with forty of her female attendants.



The fruits, provisions, and furniture, the money, plate, and

jewels, were diligently laden on the backs of horses, asses, and

mules; and the holy robbers returned in triumph to Damascus.  The

hermit, after a short and angry controversy with Caled, declined

the crown of martyrdom, and was left alive in the solitary scene

of blood and devastation.



[Footnote 64: Dair Abil Kodos.  After retrenching the last word,

the epithet, holy, I discover the Abila of Lysanias between

Damascus and Heliopolis: the name (Abil signifies a vineyard)

concurs with the situation to justify my conjecture, (Reland,

Palestin. tom. i. p 317, tom. ii. p. 526, 527.)] 

[Footnote 65: I am bolder than Mr. Ockley, (vol. i. p. 164,) who

dares not insert this figurative expression in the text, though

he observes in a marginal note, that the Arabians often borrow

their similes from that useful and familiar animal.  The reindeer

may be equally famous in the songs of the Laplanders.]



[Footnote 66:  We hear the tecbir; so the Arabs call

               Their shout of onset, when with loud appeal       



       They challenge heaven, as if demanding conquest. 

This word, so formidable in their holy wars, is a verb active,

(says Ockley in his index,) of the second conjugation, from

Kabbara, which signifies saying Alla Acbar, God is most mighty!]





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part V.



     Syria, ^67 one of the countries that have been improved by

the most early cultivation, is not unworthy of the preference.

^68 The heat of the climate is tempered by the vicinity of the

sea and mountains, by the plenty of wood and water; and the

produce of a fertile soil affords the subsistence, and encourages

the propagation, of men and animals.  From the age of David to

that of Heraclius, the country was overspread with ancient and

flourishing cities: the inhabitants were numerous and wealthy;

and, after the slow ravage of despotism and superstition, after

the recent calamities of the Persian war, Syria could still

attract and reward the rapacious tribes of the desert.  A plain,

of ten days' journey, from Damascus to Aleppo and Antioch, is

watered, on the western side, by the winding course of the

Orontes.  The hills of Libanus and Anti-Libanus are planted from

north to south, between the Orontes and the Mediterranean; and

the epithet of hollow (Coelesyria) was applied to a long and

fruitful valley, which is confined in the same direction, by the

two ridges of snowy mountains. ^69 Among the cities, which are

enumerated by Greek and Oriental names in the geography and

conquest of Syria, we may distinguish Emesa or Hems, Heliopolis

or Baalbec, the former as the metropolis of the plain, the latter

as the capital of the valley.  Under the last of the Caesars,

they were strong and populous; the turrets glittered from afar:

an ample space was covered with public and private buildings; and

the citizens were illustrious by their spirit, or at least by

their pride; by their riches, or at least by their luxury.  In

the days of Paganism, both Emesa and Heliopolis were addicted to

the worship of Baal, or the sun; but the decline of their

superstition and splendor has been marked by a singular variety

of fortune.  Not a vestige remains of the temple of Emesa, which

was equalled in poetic style to the summits of Mount Libanus, ^70

while the ruins of Baalbec, invisible to the writers of

antiquity, excite the curiosity and wonder of the European

traveller. ^71 The measure of the temple is two hundred feet in

length, and one hundred in breadth: the front is adorned with a

double portico of eight columns; fourteen may be counted on

either side; and each column, forty-five feet in height, is

composed of three massy blocks of stone or marble.  The

proportions and ornaments of the Corinthian order express the

architecture of the Greeks: but as Baalbec has never been the

seat of a monarch, we are at a loss to conceive how the expense

of these magnificent structures could be supplied by private or

municipal liberality. ^72 From the conquest of Damascus the

Saracens proceeded to Heliopolis and Emesa: but I shall decline

the repetition of the sallies and combats which have been already

shown on a larger scale. In the prosecution of the war, their

policy was not less effectual than their sword.  By short and

separate truces they dissolved the union of the enemy; accustomed

the Syrians to compare their friendship with their enmity;

familiarized the idea of their language, religion, and manners;

and exhausted, by clandestine purchase, the magazines and

arsenals of the cities which they returned to besiege.  They

aggravated the ransom of the more wealthy, or the more obstinate;

and Chalcis alone was taxed at five thousand ounces of gold, five

thousand ounces of silver, two thousand robes of silk, and as

many figs and olives as would load five thousand asses. But the

terms of truce or capitulation were faithfully observed; and the

lieutenant of the caliph, who had promised not to enter the walls

of the captive Baalbec, remained tranquil and immovable in his

tent till the jarring factions solicited the interposition of a

foreign master.  The conquest of the plain and valley of Syria

was achieved in less than two years. Yet the commander of the

faithful reproved the slowness of their progress; and the

Saracens, bewailing their fault with tears of rage and

repentance, called aloud on their chiefs to lead them forth to

fight the battles of the Lord.  In a recent action, under the

walls of Emesa, an Arabian youth, the cousin of Caled, was heard

aloud to exclaim, "Methinks I see the black-eyed girls looking

upon me; one of whom, should she appear in this world, all

mankind would die for love of her.  And I see in the hand of one

of them a handkerchief of green silk, and a cap of precious

stones, and she beckons me, and calls out, Come hither quickly,

for I love thee." With these words, charging the Christians, he

made havoc wherever he went, till, observed at length by the

governor of Hems, he was struck through with a javelin. 

[Footnote 67: In the Geography of Abulfeda, the description of

Syria, his native country, is the most interesting and authentic

portion.  It was published in Arabic and Latin, Lipsiae, 1766, in

quarto, with the learned notes of Kochler and Reiske, and some

extracts of geography and natural history from Ibn Ol Wardii. 

Among the modern travels, Pocock's Description of the East (of

Syria and Mesopotamia, vol. ii. p. 88 - 209) is a work of

superior learning and dignity; but the author too often confounds

what he had seen and what he had read.]



[Footnote 68: The praises of Dionysius are just and lively. 

Syria, (in Periegesi, v. 902, in tom. iv. Geograph. Minor.

Hudson.) In another place he styles the country differently, (v.

898.)



     This poetical geographer lived in the age of Augustus, and

his description of the world is illustrated by the Greek

commentary of Eustathius, who paid the same compliment to Homer

and Dionysius, (Fabric. Bibliot. Graec. l. iv. c. 2, tom. iii. p.

21, &c.)]



[Footnote 69: The topography of the Libanus and Anti-Libanus is

excellently described by the learning and sense of Reland,

(Palestin. tom. i. p. 311 - 326)]



[Footnote 70: - Emesae fastigia celsa renident.

                Nam diffusa solo latus explicat; ac subit auras  



                Turribus in coelum nitentibus: incola claris     



                Cor studiis acuit ...

                Denique flammicomo devoti pectora soli           



                Vitam agitant.  Libanus frondosa cacumina turget.



                Et tamen his certant celsi fastigia templi. 

These verses of the Latin version of Rufus Avienus are wanting in

the Greek original of Dionysius; and since they are likewise

unnoticed by Eustathius, I must, with Fabricius, (Bibliot. Latin.

tom. iii. p. 153, edit. Ernesti,) and against Salmasius, (ad

Vopiscum, p. 366, 367, in Hist. August.,) ascribed them to the

fancy, rather than the Mss., of Avienus.]



[Footnote 71: I am much better satisfied with Maundrell's slight

octavo, (Journey, p. 134 - 139), than with the pompous folio of

Dr. Pocock, (Description of the East, vol. ii. p. 106 - 113;) but

every preceding account is eclipsed by the magnificent

description and drawings of Mm. Dawkins and Wood, who have

transported into England the ruins of Pamyra and Baalbec.] 

[Footnote 72: The Orientals explain the prodigy by a

never-failing expedient. The edifices of Baalbec were constructed

by the fairies or the genii, Hist. de Timour Bec, tom. iii. l. v.

c. 23, p. 311, 312.  Voyage d'Otter, tom. i. p. 83.) With less

absurdity, but with equal ignorance, Abulfeda and Ibn Chaukel

ascribe them to the Sabaeans or Aadites Non sunt in omni Syria

aedificia magnificentiora his, (Tabula Syria p. 108.)]



     It was incumbent on the Saracens to exert the full powers of

their valor and enthusiasm against the forces of the emperor, who

was taught, by repeated losses, that the rovers of the desert had

undertaken, and would speedily achieve, a regular and permanent

conquest.  From the provinces of Europe and Asia, fourscore

thousand soldiers were transported by sea and land to Antioch and

Caesarea: the light troops of the army consisted of sixty

thousand Christian Arabs of the tribe of Gassan.  Under the

banner of Jabalah, the last of their princes, they marched in the

van; and it was a maxim of the Greeks, that for the purpose of

cutting diamond, a diamond was the most effectual. Heraclius

withheld his person from the dangers of the field; but his

presumption, or perhaps his despondency, suggested a peremptory

order, that the fate of the province and the war should be

decided by a single battle. The Syrians were attached to the

standard of Rome and of the cross: but the noble, the citizen,

the peasant, were exasperated by the injustice and cruelty of a

licentious host, who oppressed them as subjects, and despised

them as strangers and aliens. ^73 A report of these mighty

preparations was conveyed to the Saracens in their camp of Emesa,

and the chiefs, though resolved to fight, assembled a council:

the faith of Abu Obeidah would have expected on the same spot the

glory of martyrdom; the wisdom of Caled advised an honorable

retreat to the skirts of Palestine and Arabia, where they might

await the succors of their friends, and the attack of the

unbelievers.  A speedy messenger soon returned from the throne of

Medina, with the blessings of Omar and Ali, the prayers of the

widows of the prophet, and a reenforcement of eight thousand

Moslems.  In their way they overturned a detachment of Greeks,

and when they joined at Yermuk the camp of their brethren, they

found the pleasing intelligence, that Caled had already defeated

and scattered the Christian Arabs of the tribe of Gassan.  In the

neighborhood of Bosra, the springs of Mount Hermon descend in a

torrent to the plain of Decapolis, or ten cities; and the

Hieromax, a name which has been corrupted to Yermuk, is lost,

after a short course, in the Lake of Tiberias. ^74 The banks of

this obscure stream were illustrated by a long and bloody

encounter. ^* On this momentous occasion, the public voice, and

the modesty of Abu Obeidah, restored the command to the most

deserving of the Moslems.  Caled assumed his station in the

front, his colleague was posted in the rear, that the disorder of

the fugitive might be checked by his venerable aspect, and the

sight of the yellow banner which Mahomet had displayed before the

walls of Chaibar.  The last line was occupied by the sister of

Derar, with the Arabian women who had enlisted in this holy war,

who were accustomed to wield the bow and the lance, and who in a

moment of captivity had defended, against the uncircumcised

ravishers, their chastity and religion. ^75 The exhortation of

the generals was brief and forcible: "Paradise is before you, the

devil and hell-fire in your rear." Yet such was the weight of the

Roman cavalry, that the right wing of the Arabs was broken and

separated from the main body.  Thrice did they retreat in

disorder, and thrice were they driven back to the charge by the

reproaches and blows of the women. In the intervals of action,

Abu Obeidah visited the tents of his brethren, prolonged their

repose by repeating at once the prayers of two different hours,

bound up their wounds with his own hands, and administered the

comfortable reflection, that the infidels partook of their

sufferings without partaking of their reward.  Four thousand and

thirty of the Moslems were buried in the field of battle; and the

skill of the Armenian archers enabled seven hundred to boast that

they had lost an eye in that meritorious service.  The veterans

of the Syrian war acknowledged that it was the hardest and most

doubtful of the days which they had seen.  But it was likewise

the most decisive: many thousands of the Greeks and Syrians fell

by the swords of the Arabs; many were slaughtered, after the

defeat, in the woods and mountains; many, by mistaking the ford,

were drowned in the waters of the Yermuk; and however the loss

may be magnified, ^76 the Christian writers confess and bewail

the bloody punishment of their sins. ^77 Manuel, the Roman

general, was either killed at Damascus, or took refuge in the

monastery of Mount Sinai.  An exile in the Byzantine court,

Jabalah lamented the manners of Arabia, and his unlucky

preference of the Christian cause. ^78 He had once inclined to

the profession of Islam; but in the pilgrimage of Mecca, Jabalah

was provoked to strike one of his brethren, and fled with

amazement from the stern and equal justice of the caliph These

victorious Saracens enjoyed at Damascus a month of pleasure and

repose: the spoil was divided by the discretion of Abu Obeidah:

an equal share was allotted to a soldier and to his horse, and a

double portion was reserved for the noble coursers of the Arabian

breed.



[Footnote 73: I have read somewhere in Tacitus, or Grotius,

Subjectos habent tanquam suos, viles tanquam alienos.  Some Greek

officers ravished the wife, and murdered the child, of their

Syrian landlord; and Manuel smiled at his undutiful complaint.]



[Footnote 74: See Reland, Palestin. tom. i. p. 272, 283, tom. ii.

p. 773, 775. This learned professor was equal to the task of

describing the Holy Land, since he was alike conversant with

Greek and Latin, with Hebrew and Arabian literature.  The Yermuk,

or Hieromax, is noticed by Cellarius (Geograph. Antiq. tom. ii.

p. 392) and D'Anville, (Geographie Ancienne, tom. ii. p. 185.)

The Arabs, and even Abulfeda himself, do not seem to recognize

the scene of their victory.]



[Footnote *: Compare Price, p. 79.  The army of the Romans is

swoller to 400,000 men of which 70,000 perished. - M.]



[Footnote 75: These women were of the tribe of the Hamyarites,

who derived their origin from the ancient Amalekites.  Their

females were accustomed to ride on horseback, and to fight like

the Amazons of old, (Ockley, vol. i. p. 67.)]



[Footnote 76: We killed of them, says Abu Obeidah to the caliph,

one hundred and fifty thousand, and made prisoners forty

thousand, (Ockley vol. i. p. 241.) As I cannot doubt his

veracity, nor believe his computation, I must suspect that the

Arabic historians indulge themselves in the practice of comparing

speeches and letters for their heroes.]



[Footnote 77: After deploring the sins of the Christians,

Theophanes, adds, (Chronograph. p. 276,) does he mean Aiznadin? 

His account is brief and obscure, but he accuses the numbers of

the enemy, the adverse wind, and the cloud of dust. 

(Chronograph. p. 280.)]



[Footnote 78: See Abulfeda, (Annal. Moslem. p. 70, 71,) who

transcribes the poetical complaint of Jabalah himself, and some

panegyrical strains of an Arabian poet, to whom the chief of

Gassan sent from Constantinople a gift of five hundred pieces of

gold by the hands of the ambassador of Omar.] 

     After the battle of Yermuk, the Roman army no longer

appeared in the field; and the Saracens might securely choose,

among the fortified towns of Syria, the first object of their

attack.  They consulted the caliph whether they should march to

Caesarea or Jerusalem; and the advice of Ali determined the

immediate siege of the latter.  To a profane eye, Jerusalem was

the first or second capital of Palestine; but after Mecca and

Medina, it was revered and visited by the devout Moslems, as the

temple of the Holy Land which had been sanctified by the

revelation of Moses, of Jesus, and of Mahomet himself.  The son

of Abu Sophian was sent with five thousand Arabs to try the first

experiment of surprise or treaty; but on the eleventh day, the

town was invested by the whole force of Abu Obeidah.  He

addressed the customary summons to the chief commanders and

people of Aelia. ^79



[Footnote 79: In the name of the city, the profane prevailed over

the sacred Jerusalem was known to the devout Christians, (Euseb.

de Martyr Palest. c xi.;) but the legal and popular appellation

of Aelia (the colony of Aelius Hadrianus) has passed from the

Romans to the Arabs.  (Reland, Palestin. tom. i. p. 207, tom. ii.

p. 835. D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, Cods, p. 269, Ilia,

p. 420.) The epithet of Al Cods, the Holy, is used as the proper

name of Jerusalem.]



     "Health and happiness to every one that follows the right

way!  We require of you to testify that there is but one God, and

that Mahomet is his apostle.  If you refuse this, consent to pay

tribute, and be under us forthwith.  Otherwise I shall bring men

against you who love death better than you do the drinking of

wine or eating hog's flesh.  Nor will I ever stir from you, if it

please God, till I have destroyed those that fight for you, and

made slaves of your children." But the city was defended on every

side by deep valleys and steep ascents; since the invasion of

Syria, the walls and towers had been anxiously restored; the

bravest of the fugitives of Yermuk had stopped in the nearest

place of refuge; and in the defence of the sepulchre of Christ,

the natives and strangers might feel some sparks of the

enthusiasm, which so fiercely glowed in the bosoms of the

Saracens. The siege of Jerusalem lasted four months; not a day

was lost without some action of sally or assault; the military

engines incessantly played from the ramparts; and the inclemency

of the winter was still more painful and destructive to the

Arabs. The Christians yielded at length to the perseverance of

the besiegers.  The patriarch Sophronius appeared on the walls,

and by the voice of an interpreter demanded a conference. ^*

After a vain attempt to dissuade the lieutenant of the caliph

from his impious enterprise, he proposed, in the name of the

people, a fair capitulation, with this extraordinary clause, that

the articles of security should be ratified by the authority and

presence of Omar himself. The question was debated in the council

of Medina; the sanctity of the place, and the advice of Ali,

persuaded the caliph to gratify the wishes of his soldiers and

enemies; and the simplicity of his journey is more illustrious

than the royal pageants of vanity and oppression.  The conqueror

of Persia and Syria was mounted on a red camel, which carried,

besides his person, a bag of corn, a bag of dates, a wooden dish,

and a leathern bottle of water. Wherever he halted, the company,

without distinction, was invited to partake of his homely fare,

and the repast was consecrated by the prayer and exhortation of

the commander of the faithful. ^80 But in this expedition or

pilgrimage, his power was exercised in the administration of

justice: he reformed the licentious polygamy of the Arabs,

relieved the tributaries from extortion and cruelty, and

chastised the luxury of the Saracens, by despoiling them of their

rich silks, and dragging them on their faces in the dirt.  When

he came within sight of Jerusalem, the caliph cried with a loud

voice, "God is victorious.  O Lord, give us an easy conquest!"

and, pitching his tent of coarse hair, calmly seated himself on

the ground.  After signing the capitulation, he entered the city

without fear or precaution; and courteously discoursed with the

patriarch concerning its religious antiquities. ^81 Sophronius

bowed before his new master, and secretly muttered, in the words

of Daniel, "The abomination of desolation is in the holy place."

^82 At the hour of prayer they stood together in the church of

the resurrection; but the caliph refused to perform his

devotions, and contented himself with praying on the steps of the

church of Constantine.  To the patriarch he disclosed his prudent

and honorable motive.  "Had I yielded," said Omar, "to your

request, the Moslems of a future age would have infringed the

treaty under color of imitating my example." By his command the

ground of the temple of Solomon was prepared for the foundation

of a mosch; ^83 and, during a residence of ten days, he regulated

the present and future state of his Syrian conquests.  Medina

might be jealous, lest the caliph should be detained by the

sanctity of Jerusalem or the beauty of Damascus; her

apprehensions were dispelled by his prompt and voluntary return

to the tomb of the apostle. ^84



[Footnote *: See the explanation of this in Price, with the

prophecy which was hereby fulfilled, p 85. - M]



[Footnote 80: The singular journey and equipage of Omar are

described (besides Ockley, vol. i. p. 250) by Murtadi,

(Merveilles de l'Egypte, p. 200 - 202.)] 

[Footnote 81: The Arabs boast of an old prophecy preserved at

Jerusalem, and describing the name, the religion, and the person

of Omar, the future conqueror.  By such arts the Jews are said to

have soothed the pride of their foreign masters, Cyrus and

Alexander, (Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. xi c. 1, 8, p. 447, 579 - 582.)]



[Footnote 82: Theophan. Chronograph. p. 281.  This prediction,

which had already served for Antiochus and the Romans, was again

refitted for the present occasion, by the economy of Sophronius,

one of the deepest theologians of the Monothelite controversy.]



[Footnote 83: According to the accurate survey of D'Anville,

(Dissertation sun l'ancienne Jerusalem, p. 42 - 54,) the mosch of

Omar, enlarged and embellished by succeeding caliphs, covered the

ground of the ancient temple, (says Phocas,) a length of 215, a

breadth of 172, toises. The Nubian geographer declares, that this

magnificent structure was second only in size and beauty to the

great mosch of Cordova, (p. 113,) whose present state Mr.

Swinburne has so elegantly represented, (Travels into Spain, p.

296 - 302.)] 

[Footnote 84: Of the many Arabic tarikhs or chronicles of

Jerusalem, (D'Herbelot, p. 867,) Ockley found one among the

Pocock Mss. of Oxford, (vol. i. p. 257,) which he has used to

supply the defective narrative of Al Wakidi.] 

     To achieve what yet remained of the Syrian war the caliph

had formed two separate armies; a chosen detachment, under Amrou

and Yezid, was left in the camp of Palestine; while the larger

division, under the standard of Abu Obeidah and Caled, marched

away to the north against Antioch and Aleppo.  The latter of

these, the Beraea of the Greeks, was not yet illustrious as the

capital of a province or a kingdom; and the inhabitants, by

anticipating their submission and pleading their poverty,

obtained a moderate composition for their lives and religion. 

But the castle of Aleppo, ^85 distinct from the city, stood erect

on a lofty artificial mound the sides were sharpened to a

precipice, and faced with free-stone; and the breadth of the

ditch might be filled with water from the neighboring springs. 

After the loss of three thousand men, the garrison was still

equal to the defence; and Youkinna, their valiant and hereditary

chief, had murdered his brother, a holy monk, for daring to

pronounce the name of peace.  In a siege of four or five months,

the hardest of the Syrian war, great numbers of the Saracens were

killed and wounded: their removal to the distance of a mile could

not seduce the vigilance of Youkinna; nor could the Christians be

terrified by the execution of three hundred captives, whom they

beheaded before the castle wall.  The silence, and at length the

complaints, of Abu Obeidah informed the caliph that their hope

and patience were consumed at the foot of this impregnable

fortress.  "I am variously affected," replied Omar, "by the

difference of your success; but I charge you by no means to raise

the siege of the castle.  Your retreat would diminish the

reputation of our arms, and encourage the infidels to fall upon

you on all sides.  Remain before Aleppo till God shall determine

the event, and forage with your horse round the adjacent

country." The exhortation of the commander of the faithful was

fortified by a supply of volunteers from all the tribes of

Arabia, who arrived in the camp on horses or camels.  Among these

was Dames, of a servile birth, but of gigantic size and intrepid

resolution.  The forty-seventh day of his service he proposed,

with only thirty men, to make an attempt on the castle.  The

experience and testimony of Caled recommended his offer; and Abu

Obeidah admonished his brethren not to despise the baser origin

of Dames, since he himself, could he relinquish the public care,

would cheerfully serve under the banner of the slave.  His design

was covered by the appearance of a retreat; and the camp of the

Saracens was pitched about a league from Aleppo.  The thirty

adventurers lay in ambush at the foot of the hill; and Dames at

length succeeded in his inquiries, though he was provoked by the

ignorance of his Greek captives. "God curse these dogs," said the

illiterate Arab; "what a strange barbarous language they speak!"

At the darkest hour of the night, he scaled the most accessible

height, which he had diligently surveyed, a place where the

stones were less entire, or the slope less perpendicular, or the

guard less vigilant. Seven of the stoutest Saracens mounted on

each other's shoulders, and the weight of the column was

sustained on the broad and sinewy back of the gigantic slave. 

The foremost in this painful ascent could grasp and climb the

lowest part of the battlements; they silently stabbed and cast

down the sentinels; and the thirty brethren, repeating a pious

ejaculation, "O apostle of God, help and deliver us!" were

successively drawn up by the long folds of their turbans.  With

bold and cautious footsteps, Dames explored the palace of the

governor, who celebrated, in riotous merriment, the festival of

his deliverance.  From thence, returning to his companions, he

assaulted on the inside the entrance of the castle.  They

overpowered the guard, unbolted the gate, let down the

drawbridge, and defended the narrow pass, till the arrival of

Caled, with the dawn of day, relieved their danger and assured

their conquest.  Youkinna, a formidable foe, became an active and

useful proselyte; and the general of the Saracens expressed his

regard for the most humble merit, by detaining the army at Aleppo

till Dames was cured of his honorable wounds.  The capital of

Syria was still covered by the castle of Aazaz and the iron

bridge of the Orontes.  After the loss of those important posts,

and the defeat of the last of the Roman armies, the luxury of

Antioch ^86 trembled and obeyed.  Her safety was ransomed with

three hundred thousand pieces of gold; but the throne of the

successors of Alexander, the seat of the Roman government of the

East, which had been decorated by Caesar with the titles of free,

and holy, and inviolate was degraded under the yoke of the

caliphs to the secondary rank of a provincial town. ^87



[Footnote 85: The Persian historian of Timur (tom. iii. l. v. c.

21, p. 300) describes the castle of Aleppo as founded on a rock

one hundred cubits in height; a proof, says the French

translator, that he had never visited the place.  It is now in

the midst of the city, of no strength with a single gate; the

circuit is about 500 or 600 paces, and the ditch half full of

stagnant water, (Voyages de Tavernier, tom. i. p. 149 Pocock,

vol. ii. part i. p. 150.) The fortresses of the East are

contemptible to a European eye.] 

[Footnote 86: The date of the conquest of Antioch by the Arabs is

of some importance.  By comparing the years of the world in the

chronography of Theophanes with the years of the Hegira in the

history of Elmacin, we shall determine, that it was taken between

January 23d and September 1st of the year of Christ 638, (Pagi,

Critica, in Baron. Annal. tom. ii. p. 812, 813.) Al Wakidi

(Ockley, vol. i. p. 314) assigns that event to Tuesday, August

21st, an inconsistent date; since Easter fell that year on April

5th, the 21st of August must have been a Friday, (see the Tables

of the Art de Verifier les Dates.)]



[Footnote 87: His bounteous edict, which tempted the grateful

city to assume the victory of Pharsalia for a perpetual aera, is

given. John Malala, in Chron. p. 91, edit. Venet.  We may

distinguish his authentic information of domestic facts from his

gross ignorance of general history.] 

     In the life of Heraclius, the glories of the Persian war are

clouded on either hand by the disgrace and weakness of his more

early and his later days. When the successors of Mahomet

unsheathed the sword of war and religion, he was astonished at

the boundless prospect of toil and danger; his nature was

indolent, nor could the infirm and frigid age of the emperor be

kindled to a second effort.  The sense of shame, and the

importunities of the Syrians, prevented the hasty departure from

the scene of action; but the hero was no more; and the loss of

Damascus and Jerusalem, the bloody fields of Aiznadin and Yermuk,

may be imputed in some degree to the absence or misconduct of the

sovereign.  Instead of defending the sepulchre of Christ, he

involved the church and state in a metaphysical controversy for

the unity of his will; and while Heraclius crowned the offspring

of his second nuptials, he was tamely stripped of the most

valuable part of their inheritance.  In the cathedral of Antioch,

in the presence of the bishops, at the foot of the crucifix, he

bewailed the sins of the prince and people; but his confession

instructed the world, that it was vain, and perhaps impious, to

resist the judgment of God. The Saracens were invincible in fact,

since they were invincible in opinion; and the desertion of

Youkinna, his false repentance and repeated perfidy, might

justify the suspicion of the emperor, that he was encompassed by

traitors and apostates, who conspired to betray his person and

their country to the enemies of Christ. In the hour of adversity,

his superstition was agitated by the omens and dreams of a

falling crown; and after bidding an eternal farewell to Syria, he

secretly embarked with a few attendants, and absolved the faith

of his subjects. ^88 Constantine, his eldest son, had been

stationed with forty thousand men at Caesarea, the civil

metropolis of the three provinces of Palestine.  But his private

interest recalled him to the Byzantine court; and, after the

flight of his father, he felt himself an unequal champion to the

united force of the caliph.  His vanguard was boldly attacked by

three hundred Arabs and a thousand black slaves, who, in the

depth of winter, had climbed the snowy mountains of Libanus, and

who were speedily followed by the victorious squadrons of Caled

himself.  From the north and south the troops of Antioch and

Jerusalem advanced along the sea-shore till their banners were

joined under the walls of the Phoenician cities: Tripoli and Tyre

were betrayed; and a fleet of fifty transports, which entered

without distrust the captive harbors, brought a seasonable supply

of arms and provisions to the camp of the Saracens.  Their labors

were terminated by the unexpected surrender of Caesarea: the

Roman prince had embarked in the night; ^89 and the defenceless

citizens solicited their pardon with an offering of two hundred

thousand pieces of gold.  The remainder of the province, Ramlah,

Ptolemais or Acre, Sichem or Neapolis, Gaza, Ascalon, Berytus,

Sidon, Gabala, Laodicea, Apamea, Hierapolis, no longer presumed

to dispute the will of the conqueror; and Syria bowed under the

sceptre of the caliphs seven hundred years after Pompey had

despoiled the last of the Macedonian kings. ^90 

[Footnote 88: See Ockley, (vol. i. p. 308, 312,) who laughs at

the credulity of his author.  When Heraclius bade farewell to

Syria, Vale Syria et ultimum vale, he prophesied that the Romans

should never reenter the province till the birth of an

inauspicious child, the future scourge of the empire.  Abulfeda,

p. 68.  I am perfectly ignorant of the mystic sense, or nonsense,

of this prediction.]



[Footnote 89: In the loose and obscure chronology of the times, I

am guided by an authentic record, (in the book of ceremonies of

Constantine Porphyrogenitus,) which certifies that, June 4, A.D.

638, the emperor crowned his younger son Heraclius, in the

presence of his eldest, Constantine, and in the palace of

Constantinople; that January 1, A.D. 639, the royal procession

visited the great church, and on the 4th of the same month, the

hippodrome.] 



[Footnote 90: Sixty-five years before Christ, Syria Pontusque

monumenta sunt Cn. Pompeii virtutis, (Vell. Patercul. ii. 38,)

rather of his fortune and power: he adjudged Syria to be a Roman

province, and the last of the Seleucides were incapable of

drawing a sword in the defence of their patrimony (see the

original texts collected by Usher, Annal. p. 420)] 





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part VI.



     The sieges and battles of six campaigns had consumed many

thousands of the Moslems.  They died with the reputation and the

cheerfulness of martyrs; and the simplicity of their faith may be

expressed in the words of an Arabian youth, when he embraced, for

the last time, his sister and mother: "It is not," said he, "the

delicacies of Syria, or the fading delights of this world, that

have prompted me to devote my life in the cause of religion.  But

I seek the favor of God and his apostle; and I have heard, from

one of the companions of the prophet, that the spirits of the

martyrs will be lodged in the crops of green birds, who shall

taste the fruits, and drink of the rivers, of paradise. Farewell,

we shall meet again among the groves and fountains which God has

provided for his elect." The faithful captives might exercise a

passive and more arduous resolution; and a cousin of Mahomet is

celebrated for refusing, after an abstinence of three days, the

wine and pork, the only nourishment that was allowed by the

malice of the infidels.  The frailty of some weaker brethren

exasperated the implacable spirit of fanaticism; and the father

of Amer deplored, in pathetic strains, the apostasy and damnation

of a son, who had renounced the promises of God, and the

intercession of the prophet, to occupy, with the priests and

deacons, the lowest mansions of hell.  The more fortunate Arabs,

who survived the war and persevered in the faith, were restrained

by their abstemious leader from the abuse of prosperity.  After a

refreshment of three days, Abu Obeidah withdrew his troops from

the pernicious contagion of the luxury of Antioch, and assured

the caliph that their religion and virtue could only be preserved

by the hard discipline of poverty and labor.  But the virtue of

Omar, however rigorous to himself, was kind and liberal to his

brethren.  After a just tribute of praise and thanksgiving, he

dropped a tear of compassion; and sitting down on the ground,

wrote an answer, in which he mildly censured the severity of his

lieutenant: "God," said the successor of the prophet, "has not

forbidden the use of the good things of this worl to faithful

men, and such as have performed good works.  Therefore you ought

to have given them leave to rest themselves, and partake freely

of those good things which the country affordeth.  If any of the

Saracens have no family in Arabia, they may marry in Syria; and

whosoever of them wants any female slaves, he may purchase as

many as he hath occasion for." The conquerors prepared to use, or

to abuse, this gracious permission; but the year of their triumph

was marked by a mortality of men and cattle; and twenty-five

thousand Saracens were snatched away from the possession of

Syria. The death of Abu Obeidah might be lamented by the

Christians; but his brethren recollected that he was one of the

ten elect whom the prophet had named as the heirs of paradise.

^91 Caled survived his brethren about three years: and the tomb

of the Sword of God is shown in the neighborhood of Emesa.  His

valor, which founded in Arabia and Syria the empire of the

caliphs, was fortified by the opinion of a special providence;

and as long as he wore a cap, which had been blessed by Mahomet,

he deemed himself invulnerable amidst the darts of the infidels.

^*



[Footnote 91: Abulfeda, Annal. Moslem. p. 73.  Mahomet could

artfully vary the praises of his disciples.  Of Omar he was

accustomed to say, that if a prophet could arise after himself,

it would be Omar; and that in a general calamity, Omar would be

accepted by the divine justice, (Ockley, vol. i. p. 221.)] 

[Footnote *: Khaled, according to the Rouzont Uzzuffa, (Price, p.

90,) after having been deprived of his ample share of the plunder

of Syria by the jealousy of Omar, died, possessed only of his

horse, his arms, and a single slave.  Yet Omar was obliged to

acknowledge to his lamenting parent. that never mother had

produced a son like Khaled. - M.]



     The place of the first conquerors was supplied by a new

generation of their children and countrymen: Syria became the

seat and support of the house of Ommiyah; and the revenue, the

soldiers, the ships of that powerful kingdom were consecrated to

enlarge on every side the empire of the caliphs.  But the

Saracens despise a superfluity of fame; and their historians

scarcely condescend to mention the subordinate conquests which

are lost in the splendor and rapidity of their victorious career.



To the north of Syria, they passed Mount Taurus, and reduced to

their obedience the province of Cilicia, with its capital Tarsus,

the ancient monument of the Assyrian kings.  Beyond a second

ridge of the same mountains, they spread the flame of war, rather

than the light of religion, as far as the shores of the Euxine,

and the neighborhood of Constantinople.  To the east they

advanced to the banks and sources of the Euphrates and Tigris:

^92 the long disputed barrier of Rome and Persia was forever

confounded the walls of Edessa and Amida, of Dara and Nisibis,

which had resisted the arms and engines of Sapor or Nushirvan,

were levelled in the dust; and the holy city of Abgarus might

vainly produce the epistle or the image of Christ to an

unbelieving conqueror.  To the west the Syrian kingdom is bounded

by the sea: and the ruin of Aradus, a small island or peninsula

on the coast, was postponed during ten years.  But the hills of

Libanus abounded in timber; the trade of Phoenicia was populous

in mariners; and a fleet of seventeen hundred barks was equipped

and manned by the natives of the desert. The Imperial navy of the

Romans fled before them from the Pamphylian rocks to the

Hellespont; but the spirit of the emperor, a grandson of

Heraclius, had been subdued before the combat by a dream and a

pun. ^93 The Saracens rode masters of the sea; and the islands of

Cyprus, Rhodes, and the Cyclades, were successively exposed to

their rapacious visits.  Three hundred years before the Christian

aera, the memorable though fruitless siege of Rhodes ^94 by

Demetrius had furnished that maritime republic with the materials

and the subject of a trophy.  A gigantic statue of Apollo, or the

sun, seventy cubits in height, was erected at the entrance of the

harbor, a monument of the freedom and the arts of Greece.  After

standing fifty-six years, the colossus of Rhodes was overthrown

by an earthquake; but the massy trunk, and huge fragments, lay

scattered eight centuries on the ground, and are often described

as one of the wonders of the ancient world. They were collected

by the diligence of the Saracens, and sold to a Jewish merchant

of Edessa, who is said to have laden nine hundred camels with the

weight of the brass metal; an enormous weight, though we should

include the hundred colossal figures, ^95 and the three thousand

statues, which adorned the prosperity of the city of the sun.



[Footnote 92: Al Wakidi had likewise written a history of the

conquest of Diarbekir, or Mesopotamia, (Ockley, at the end of the

iid vol.,) which our interpreters do not appear to have seen. 

The Chronicle of Dionysius of Telmar, the Jacobite patriarch,

records the taking of Edessa A.D. 637, and of Dara A.D. 641,

(Asseman. Bibliot. Orient. tom. ii. p. 103;) and the attentive

may glean some doubtful information from the Chronography of

Theophanes, (p. 285 - 287.) Most of the towns of Mesopotamia

yielded by surrender, (Abulpharag. p. 112.)



     Note: It has been published in Arabic by M. Ewald St.

Martin, vol. xi p 248; but its authenticity is doubted. - M.]



[Footnote 93: He dreamt that he was at Thessalonica, a harmless

and unmeaning vision; but his soothsayer, or his cowardice,

understood the sure omen of a defeat concealed in that

inauspicious word, Give to another the victory, (Theoph. p. 286.

Zonaras, tom. ii. l. xiv. p. 88.)]



[Footnote 94: Every passage and every fact that relates to the

isle, the city, and the colossus of Rhodes, are compiled in the

laborious treatise of Meursius, who has bestowed the same

diligence on the two larger islands of the Crete and Cyprus. 

See, in the iiid vol. of his works, the Rhodus of Meursius, (l.

i. c. 15, p. 715 - 719.) The Byzantine writers, Theophanes and

Constantine, have ignorantly prolonged the term to 1360 years,

and ridiculously divide the weight among 30,000 camels.]



[Footnote 95: Centum colossi alium nobilitaturi locum, says

Pliny, with his usual spirit.  Hist. Natur. xxxiv. 18.]



     II.  The conquest of Egypt may be explained by the character

of the victorious Saracen, one of the first of his nation, in an

age when the meanest of the brethren was exalted above his nature

by the spirit of enthusiasm.  The birth of Amrou was at once base

and illustrious; his mother, a notorious prostitute, was unable

to decide among five of the Koreish; but the proof of resemblance

adjudged the child to Aasi, the oldest of her lovers. ^96 The

youth of Amrou was impelled by the passions and prejudices of his

kindred: his poetic genius was exercised in satirical verses

against the person and doctrine of Mahomet; his dexterity was

employed by the reigning faction to pursue the religious exiles

who had taken refuge in the court of the Aethiopian king. ^97 Yet

he returned from this embassy a secret proselyte; his reason or

his interest determined him to renounce the worship of idols; he

escaped from Mecca with his friend Caled; and the prophet of

Medina enjoyed at the same moment the satisfaction of embracing

the two firmest champions of his cause.  The impatience of Amrou

to lead the armies of the faithful was checked by the reproof of

Omar, who advised him not to seek power and dominion, since he

who is a subject to-day, may be a prince to-morrow.  Yet his

merit was not overlooked by the two first successors of Mahomet;

they were indebted to his arms for the conquest of Palestine; and

in all the battles and sieges of Syria, he united with the temper

of a chief the valor of an adventurous soldier.  In a visit to

Medina, the caliph expressed a wish to survey the sword which had

cut down so many Christian warriors; the son of Aasi unsheathed a

short and ordinary cimeter; and as he perceived the surprise of

Omar, "Alas," said the modest Saracen, "the sword itself, without

the arm of its master, is neither sharper nor more weighty than

the sword of Pharezdak the poet." ^98 After the conquest of

Egypt, he was recalled by the jealousy of the caliph Othman; but

in the subsequent troubles, the ambition of a soldier, a

statesman, and an orator, emerged from a private station.  His

powerful support, both in council and in the field, established

the throne of the Ommiades; the administration and revenue of

Egypt were restored by the gratitude of Moawiyah to a faithful

friend who had raised himself above the rank of a subject; and

Amrou ended his days in the palace and city which he had founded

on the banks of the Nile.  His dying speech to his children is

celebrated by the Arabians as a model of eloquence and wisdom: he

deplored the errors of his youth but if the penitent was still

infected by the vanity of a poet, he might exaggerate the venom

and mischief of his impious compositions. ^99



[Footnote 96: We learn this anecdote from a spirited old woman,

who reviled to their faces, the caliph and his friend.  She was

encouraged by the silence of Amrou and the liberality of

Moawiyah, (Abulfeda, Annal Moslem. p. 111.)] 

[Footnote 97: Gagnier, Vie de Mahomet, tom. ii. p. 46, &c., who

quotes the Abyssinian history, or romance of Abdel Balcides.  Yet

the fact of the embassy and ambassador may be allowed.]



[Footnote 98: This saying is preserved by Pocock, (Not. ad Carmen

Tograi, p 184,) and justly applauded by Mr. Harris,

(Philosophical Arrangements, p. 850.)]



[Footnote 99: For the life and character of Amrou, see Ockley

(Hist. of the Saracens, vol. i. p. 28, 63, 94, 328, 342, 344, and

to the end of the volume; vol. ii. p. 51, 55, 57, 74, 110 - 112,

162) and Otter, (Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi.

p. 131, 132.) The readers of Tacitus may aptly compare Vespasian

and Mucianus with Moawiyah and Amrou.  Yet the resemblance is

still more in the situation, than in the characters, of the men.]



     From his camp in Palestine, Amrou had surprised or

anticipated the caliph's leave for the invasion of Egypt. ^100

The magnanimous Omar trusted in his God and his sword, which had

shaken the thrones of Chosroes and Caesar: but when he compared

the slender force of the Moslems with the greatness of the

enterprise, he condemned his own rashness, and listened to his

timid companions.  The pride and the greatness of Pharaoh were

familiar to the readers of the Koran; and a tenfold repetition of

prodigies had been scarcely sufficient to effect, not the

victory, but the flight, of six hundred thousand of the children

of Israel: the cities of Egypt were many and populous; their

architecture was strong and solid; the Nile, with its numerous

branches, was alone an insuperable barrier; and the granary of

the Imperial city would be obstinately defended by the Roman

powers.  In this perplexity, the commander of the faithful

resigned himself to the decision of chance, or, in his opinion,

of Providence.  At the head of only four thousand Arabs, the

intrepid Amrou had marched away from his station of Gaza when he

was overtaken by the messenger of Omar.  "If you are still in

Syria," said the ambiguous mandate, "retreat without delay; but

if, at the receipt of this epistle, you have already reached the

frontiers of Egypt, advance with confidence, and depend on the

succor of God and of your brethren." The experience, perhaps the

secret intelligence, of Amrou had taught him to suspect the

mutability of courts; and he continued his march till his tents

were unquestionably pitched on Egyptian ground.  He there

assembled his officers, broke the seal, perused the epistle,

gravely inquired the name and situation of the place, and

declared his ready obedience to the commands of the caliph. 

After a siege of thirty days, he took possession of Farmah or

Pelusium; and that key of Egypt, as it has been justly named,

unlocked the entrance of the country as far as the ruins of

Heliopolis and the neighborhood of the modern Cairo.



[Footnote 100: Al Wakidi had likewise composed a separate history

of the conquest of Egypt, which Mr. Ockley could never procure;

and his own inquiries (vol. i. 344 - 362) have added very little

to the original text of Eutychius, (Annal. tom. ii. p. 296 - 323,

vers. Pocock,) the Melchite patriarch of Alexandria, who lived

three hundred years after the revolution.] 

     On the Western side of the Nile, at a small distance to the

east of the Pyramids, at a small distance to the south of the

Delta, Memphis, one hundred and fifty furlongs in circumference,

displayed the magnificence of ancient kings.  Under the reign of

the Ptolemies and Caesars, the seat of government was removed to

the sea-coast; the ancient capital was eclipsed by the arts and

opulence of Alexandria; the palaces, and at length the temples,

were reduced to a desolate and ruinous condition: yet, in the age

of Augustus, and even in that of Constantine, Memphis was still

numbered among the greatest and most populous of the provincial

cities. ^101 The banks of the Nile, in this place of the breadth

of three thousand feet, were united by two bridges of sixty and

of thirty boats, connected in the middle stream by the small

island of Rouda, which was covered with gardens and habitations.

^102 The eastern extremity of the bridge was terminated by the

town of Babylon and the camp of a Roman legion, which protected

the passage of the river and the second capital of Egypt.  This

important fortress, which might fairly be described as a part of

Memphis or Misrah, was invested by the arms of the lieutenant of

Omar: a reenforcement of four thousand Saracens soon arrived in

his camp; and the military engines, which battered the walls, may

be imputed to the art and labor of his Syrian allies.  Yet the

siege was protracted to seven months; and the rash invaders were

encompassed and threatened by the inundation of the Nile. ^103

Their last assault was bold and successful: they passed the

ditch, which had been fortified with iron spikes, applied their

scaling ladders, entered the fortress with the shout of "God is

victorious!" and drove the remnant of the Greeks to their boats

and the Isle of Rouda.  The spot was afterwards recommended to

the conqueror by the easy communication with the gulf and the

peninsula of Arabia; the remains of Memphis were deserted; the

tents of the Arabs were converted into permanent habitations; and

the first mosch was blessed by the presence of fourscore

companions of Mahomet. ^104 A new city arose in their camp, on

the eastward bank of the Nile; and the contiguous quarters of

Babylon and Fostat are confounded in their present decay by the

appellation of old Misrah, or Cairo, of which they form an

extensive suburb.  But the name of Cairo, the town of victory,

more strictly belongs to the modern capital, which was founded in

the tenth century by the Fatimite caliphs. ^105 It has gradually

receded from the river; but the continuity of buildings may be

traced by an attentive eye from the monuments of Sesostris to

those of Saladin. ^106



[Footnote 101: Strabo, an accurate and attentive spectator,

observes of Heliopolis, (Geograph. l. xvii. p. 1158;) but of

Memphis he notices, however, the mixture of inhabitants, and the

ruin of the palaces.  In the proper Egypt, Ammianus enumerates

Memphis among the four cities, maximis urbibus quibus provincia

nitet, (xxii. 16;) and the name of Memphis appears with

distinction in the Roman Itinerary and episcopal lists.]



[Footnote 102: These rare and curious facts, the breadth (2946

feet) and the bridge of the Nile, are only to be found in the

Danish traveller and the Nubian geographer, (p. 98.)]



[Footnote 103: From the month of April, the Nile begins

imperceptibly to rise; the swell becomes strong and visible in

the moon after the summer solstice, (Plin. Hist. Nat. v. 10,) and

is usually proclaimed at Cairo on St. Peter's day, (June 29.) A

register of thirty successive years marks the greatest height of

the waters between July 25 and August 18, (Maillet, Description

de l'Egypte, lettre xi. p. 67, &c. Pocock's Description of the

East, vol. i. p. 200.  Shaw's Travels, p. 383.)]



[Footnote 104: Murtadi, Merveilles de l'Egypte, 243, 259.  He

expatiates on the subject with the zeal and minuteness of a

citizen and a bigot, and his local traditions have a strong air

of truth and accuracy.] 

[Footnote 105: D'Herbelot, Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 233.] 

[Footnote 106: The position of New and of Old Cairo is well

known, and has been often described.  Two writers, who were

intimately acquainted with ancient and modern Egypt, have fixed,

after a learned inquiry, the city of Memphis at Gizeh, directly

opposite the Old Cairo, (Sicard, Nouveaux Memoires des Missions

du Levant, tom. vi. p. 5, 6.  Shaw's Observations and Travels, p.

296 - 304.) Yet we may not disregard the authority or the

arguments of Pocock, (vol. i. p. 25 - 41,) Niebuhr, (Voyage, tom.

i. p. 77 - 106,) and above all, of D'Anville, (Description de

l'Egypte, p. 111, 112, 130 - 149,) who have removed Memphis

towards the village of Mohannah, some miles farther to the south.



In their heat, the disputants have forgot that the ample space of

a metropolis covers and annihilates the far greater part of the

controversy.] 

     Yet the Arabs, after a glorious and profitable enterprise,

must have retreated to the desert, had they not found a powerful

alliance in the heart of the country.  The rapid conquest of

Alexander was assisted by the superstition and revolt of the

natives: they abhorred their Persian oppressors, the disciples of

the Magi, who had burnt the temples of Egypt, and feasted with

sacrilegious appetite on the flesh of the god Apis. ^107 After a

period of ten centuries, the same revolution was renewed by a

similar cause; and in the support of an incomprehensible creed,

the zeal of the Coptic Christians was equally ardent.  I have

already explained the origin and progress of the Monophysite

controversy, and the persecution of the emperors, which converted

a sect into a nation, and alienated Egypt from their religion and

government.  The Saracens were received as the deliverers of the

Jacobite church; and a secret and effectual treaty was opened

during the siege of Memphis between a victorious army and a

people of slaves.  A rich and noble Egyptian, of the name of

Mokawkas, had dissembled his faith to obtain the administration

of his province: in the disorders of the Persian war he aspired

to independence: the embassy of Mahomet ranked him among princes;

but he declined, with rich gifts and ambiguous compliments, the

proposal of a new religion. ^108 The abuse of his trust exposed

him to the resentment of Heraclius: his submission was delayed by

arrogance and fear; and his conscience was prompted by interest

to throw himself on the favor of the nation and the support of

the Saracens.  In his first conference with Amrou, he heard

without indignation the usual option of the Koran, the tribute,

or the sword.  "The Greeks," replied Mokawkas, "are determined to

abide the determination of the sword; but with the Greeks I

desire no communion, either in this world or in the next, and I

abjure forever the Byzantine tyrant, his synod of Chalcedon, and

his Melchite slaves.  For myself and my brethren, we are resolved

to live and die in the profession of the gospel and unity of

Christ.  It is impossible for us to embrace the revelations of

your prophet; but we are desirous of peace, and cheerfully submit

to pay tribute and obedience to his temporal successors." The

tribute was ascertained at two pieces of gold for the head of

every Christian; but old men, monks, women, and children, of both

sexes, under sixteen years of age, were exempted from this

personal assessment: the Copts above and below Memphis swore

allegiance to the caliph, and promised a hospitable entertainment

of three days to every Mussulman who should travel through their

country.  By this charter of security, the ecclesiastical and

civil tyranny of the Melchites was destroyed: ^109 the anathemas

of St. Cyril were thundered from every pulpit; and the sacred

edifices, with the patrimony of the church, were restored to the

national communion of the Jacobites, who enjoyed without

moderation the moment of triumph and revenge.  At the pressing

summons of Amrou, their patriarch Benjamin emerged from his

desert; and after the first interview, the courteous Arab

affected to declare that he had never conversed with a Christian

priest of more innocent manners and a more venerable aspect. ^110

In the march from Memphis to Alexandria, the lieutenant of Omar

intrusted his safety to the zeal and gratitude of the Egyptians:

the roads and bridges were diligently repaired; and in every step

of his progress, he could depend on a constant supply of

provisions and intelligence.  The Greeks of Egypt, whose numbers

could scarcely equal a tenth of the natives, were overwhelmed by

the universal defection: they had ever been hated, they were no

longer feared: the magistrate fled from his tribunal, the bishop

from his altar; and the distant garrisons were surprised or

starved by the surrounding multitudes.  Had not the Nile afforded

a safe and ready conveyance to the sea, not an individual could

have escaped, who by birth, or language, or office, or religion,

was connected with their odious name.



[Footnote 107: See Herodotus, l. iii. c. 27, 28, 29.  Aelian,

Hist. Var. l. iv. c. 8. Suidas in, tom. ii. p. 774.  Diodor.

Sicul. tom. ii. l. xvii. p. 197, edit. Wesseling.  Says the last

of these historians.] 

[Footnote 108: Mokawkas sent the prophet two Coptic damsels, with

two maids and one eunuch, an alabaster vase, an ingot of pure

gold, oil, honey, and the finest white linen of Egypt, with a

horse, a mule, and an ass, distinguished by their respective

qualifications.  The embassy of Mahomet was despatched from

Medina in the seventh year of the Hegira, (A.D. 628.) See

Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet, tom. ii. p. 255, 256, 303,) from Al

Jannabi.]



[Footnote 109: The praefecture of Egypt, and the conduct of the

war, had been trusted by Heraclius to the patriarch Cyrus,

(Theophan. p. 280, 281.) "In Spain," said James II., "do you not

consult your priests?" "We do," replied the Catholic ambassador,

"and our affairs succeed accordingly." I know not how to relate

the plans of Cyrus, of paying tribute without impairing the

revenue, and of converting Omar by his marriage with the

Emperor's daughter, (Nicephor. Breviar. p. 17, 18.)]



[Footnote 110: See the life of Benjamin, in Renaudot, (Hist.

Patriarch. Alexandrin. p. 156 - 172,) who has enriched the

conquest of Egypt with some facts from the Arabic text of Severus

the Jacobite historian] 

     By the retreat of the Greeks from the provinces of Upper

Egypt, a considerable force was collected in the Island of Delta;

the natural and artificial channels of the Nile afforded a

succession of strong and defensible posts; and the road to

Alexandria was laboriously cleared by the victory of the Saracens

in two-and-twenty days of general or partial combat.  In their

annals of conquest, the siege of Alexandria ^111 is perhaps the

most arduous and important enterprise.  The first trading city in

the world was abundantly replenished with the means of

subsistence and defence.  Her numerous inhabitants fought for the

dearest of human rights, religion and property; and the enmity of

the natives seemed to exclude them from the common benefit of

peace and toleration.  The sea was continually open; and if

Heraclius had been awake to the public distress, fresh armies of

Romans and Barbarians might have been poured into the harbor to

save the second capital of the empire.  A circumference of ten

miles would have scattered the forces of the Greeks, and favored

the stratagems of an active enemy; but the two sides of an oblong

square were covered by the sea and the Lake Maraeotis, and each

of the narrow ends exposed a front of no more than ten furlongs. 

The efforts of the Arabs were not inadequate to the difficulty of

the attempt and the value of the prize.  From the throne of

Medina, the eyes of Omar were fixed on the camp and city: his

voice excited to arms the Arabian tribes and the veterans of

Syria; and the merit of a holy war was recommended by the

peculiar fame and fertility of Egypt. Anxious for the ruin or

expulsion of their tyrants, the faithful natives devoted their

labors to the service of Amrou: some sparks of martial spirit

were perhaps rekindled by the example of their allies; and the

sanguine hopes of Mokawkas had fixed his sepulchre in the church

of St. John of Alexandria.  Eutychius the patriarch observes,

that the Saracens fought with the courage of lions: they repulsed

the frequent and almost daily sallies of the besieged, and soon

assaulted in their turn the walls and towers of the city.  In

every attack, the sword, the banner of Amrou, glittered in the

van of the Moslems.  On a memorable day, he was betrayed by his

imprudent valor: his followers who had entered the citadel were

driven back; and the general, with a friend and slave, remained a

prisoner in the hands of the Christians. When Amrou was conducted

before the praefect, he remembered his dignity, and forgot his

situation: a lofty demeanor, and resolute language, revealed the

lieutenant of the caliph, and the battle-axe of a soldier was

already raised to strike off the head of the audacious captive. 

His life was saved by the readiness of his slave, who instantly

gave his master a blow on the face, and commanded him, with an

angry tone, to be silent in the presence of his superiors.  The

credulous Greek was deceived: he listened to the offer of a

treaty, and his prisoners were dismissed in the hope of a more

respectable embassy, till the joyful acclamations of the camp

announced the return of their general, and insulted the folly of

the infidels.  At length, after a siege of fourteen months, ^112

and the loss of three-and-twenty thousand men, the Saracens

prevailed: the Greeks embarked their dispirited and diminished

numbers, and the standard of Mahomet was planted on the walls of

the capital of Egypt.  "I have taken," said Amrou to the caliph,

"the great city of the West.  It is impossible for me to

enumerate the variety of its riches and beauty; and I shall

content myself with observing, that it contains four thousand

palaces, four thousand baths, four hundred theatres or places of

amusement, twelve thousand shops for the sale of vegetable food,

and forty thousand tributary Jews.  The town has been subdued by

force of arms, without treaty or capitulation, and the Moslems

are impatient to seize the fruits of their victory." ^113 The

commander of the faithful rejected with firmness the idea of

pillage, and directed his lieutenant to reserve the wealth and

revenue of Alexandria for the public service and the propagation

of the faith: the inhabitants were numbered; a tribute was

imposed, the zeal and resentment of the Jacobites were curbed,

and the Melchites who submitted to the Arabian yoke were indulged

in the obscure but tranquil exercise of their worship.  The

intelligence of this disgraceful and calamitous event afflicted

the declining health of the emperor; and Heraclius died of a

dropsy about seven weeks after the loss of Alexandria. ^114 Under

the minority of his grandson, the clamors of a people, deprived

of their daily sustenance, compelled the Byzantine court to

undertake the recovery of the capital of Egypt.  In the space of

four years, the harbor and fortifications of Alexandria were

twice occupied by a fleet and army of Romans.  They were twice

expelled by the valor of Amrou, who was recalled by the domestic

peril from the distant wars of Tripoli and Nubia. But the

facility of the attempt, the repetition of the insult, and the

obstinacy of the resistance, provoked him to swear, that if a

third time he drove the infidels into the sea, he would render

Alexandria as accessible on all sides as the house of a

prostitute.  Faithful to his promise, he dismantled several parts

of the walls and towers; but the people was spared in the

chastisement of the city, and the mosch of Mercy was erected on

the spot where the victorious general had stopped the fury of his

troops. 

[Footnote 111: The local description of Alexandria is perfectly

ascertained by the master hand of the first of geographers,

(D'Anville, Memoire sur l'Egypte, p. 52 - 63;) but we may borrow

the eyes of the modern travellers, more especially of Thevenot,

(Voyage au Levant, part i. p. 381 - 395,) Pocock, (vol. i. p. 2 -

13,) and Niebuhr, (Voyage en Arabie, tom. i. p. 34 - 43.) Of the

two modern rivals, Savary and Volmey, the one may amuse, the

other will instruct.]



[Footnote 112: Both Eutychius (Annal. tom. ii. p. 319) and

Elmacin (Hist. Saracen. p. 28) concur in fixing the taking of

Alexandria to Friday of the new moon of Moharram of the twentieth

year of the Hegira, (December 22, A.D. 640.) In reckoning

backwards fourteen months spent before Alexandria, seven months

before Babylon, &c., Amrou might have invaded Egypt about the end

of the year 638; but we are assured that he entered the country

the 12th of Bayni, 6th of June, (Murtadi, Merveilles de l'Egypte,

p. 164. Severus, apud Renaudot, p. 162.) The Saracen, and

afterwards Lewis IX. of France, halted at Pelusium, or Damietta,

during the season of the inundation of the Nile.] 

[Footnote 113: Eutych. Annal. tom. ii. p. 316, 319.]



[Footnote 114: Notwithstanding some inconsistencies of Theophanes

and Cedrenus, the accuracy of Pagi (Critica, tom. ii. p. 824) has

extracted from Nicephorus and the Chronicon Orientale the true

date of the death of Heraclius, February 11th, A.D. 641, fifty

days after the loss of Alexandria. A fourth of that time was

sufficient to convey the intelligence.] 





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part VII.



     I should deceive the expectation of the reader, if I passed

in silence the fate of the Alexandrian library, as it is

described by the learned Abulpharagius.  The spirit of Amrou was

more curious and liberal than that of his brethren, and in his

leisure hours, the Arabian chief was pleased with the

conversation of John, the last disciple of Ammonius, and who

derived the surname of Philoponus from his laborious studies of

grammar and philosophy. ^115 Emboldened by this familiar

intercourse, Philoponus presumed to solicit a gift, inestimable

in his opinion, contemptible in that of the Barbarians - the

royal library, which alone, among the spoils of Alexandria, had

not been appropriated by the visit and the seal of the conqueror.



Amrou was inclined to gratify the wish of the grammarian, but his

rigid integrity refused to alienate the minutest object without

the consent of the caliph; and the well-known answer of Omar was

inspired by the ignorance of a fanatic.  "If these writings of

the Greeks agree with the book of God, they are useless, and need

not be preserved: if they disagree, they are pernicious, and

ought to be destroyed." The sentence was executed with blind

obedience: the volumes of paper or parchment were distributed to

the four thousand baths of the city; and such was their

incredible multitude, that six months were barely sufficient for

the consumption of this precious fuel.  Since the Dynasties of

Abulpharagius ^116 have been given to the world in a Latin

version, the tale has been repeatedly transcribed; and every

scholar, with pious indignation, has deplored the irreparable

shipwreck of the learning, the arts, and the genius, of

antiquity.  For my own part, I am strongly tempted to deny both

the fact and the consequences. ^* The fact is indeed marvellous. 

"Read and wonder!" says the historian himself: and the solitary

report of a stranger who wrote at the end of six hundred years on

the confines of Media, is overbalanced by the silence of two

annalist of a more early date, both Christians, both natives of

Egypt, and the most ancient of whom, the patriarch Eutychius, has

amply described the conquest of Alexandria. ^117 The rigid

sentence of Omar is repugnant to the sound and orthodox precept

of the Mahometan casuists they expressly declare, that the

religious books of the Jews and Christians, which are acquired by

the right of war, should never be committed to the flames; and

that the works of profane science, historians or poets,

physicians or philosophers, may be lawfully applied to the use of

the faithful. ^118 A more destructive zeal may perhaps be

attributed to the first successors of Mahomet; yet in this

instance, the conflagration would have speedily expired in the

deficiency of materials. I should not recapitulate the disasters

of the Alexandrian library, the involuntary flame that was

kindled by Caesar in his own defence, ^119 or the mischievous

bigotry of the Christians, who studied to destroy the monuments

of idolatry. ^120 But if we gradually descend from the age of the

Antonines to that of Theodosius, we shall learn from a chain of

contemporary witnesses, that the royal palace and the temple of

Serapis no longer contained the four, or the seven, hundred

thousand volumes, which had been assembled by the curiosity and

magnificence of the Ptolemies. ^121 Perhaps the church and seat

of the patriarchs might be enriched with a repository of books;

but if the ponderous mass of Arian and Monophysite controversy

were indeed consumed in the public baths, ^122 a philosopher may

allow, with a smile, that it was ultimately devoted to the

benefit of mankind.  I sincerely regret the more valuable

libraries which have been involved in the ruin of the Roman

empire; but when I seriously compute the lapse of ages, the waste

of ignorance, and the calamities of war, our treasures, rather

than our losses, are the objects of my surprise.  Many curious

and interesting facts are buried in oblivion: the three great

historians of Rome have been transmitted to our hands in a

mutilated state, and we are deprived of many pleasing

compositions of the lyric, iambic, and dramatic poetry of the

Greeks.  Yet we should gratefully remember, that the mischances

of time and accident have spared the classic works to which the

suffrage of antiquity ^123 had adjudged the first place of genius

and glory: the teachers of ancient knowledge, who are still

extant, had perused and compared the writings of their

predecessors; ^124 nor can it fairly be presumed that any

important truth, any useful discovery in art or nature, has been

snatched away from the curiosity of modern ages.



[Footnote 115: Many treatises of this lover of labor are still

extant, but for readers of the present age, the printed and

unpublished are nearly in the same predicament.  Moses and

Aristotle are the chief objects of his verbose commentaries, one

of which is dated as early as May 10th, A.D. 617, (Fabric.

Bibliot. Graec. tom. ix. p. 458 - 468.) A modern, (John Le

Clerc,) who sometimes assumed the same name was equal to old

Philoponus in diligence, and far superior in good sense and real

knowledge.]



[Footnote 116: Abulpharag. Dynast. p. 114, vers. Pocock.  Audi

quid factum sit et mirare.  It would be endless to enumerate the

moderns who have wondered and believed, but I may distinguish

with honor the rational scepticism of Renaudot, (Hist. Alex.

Patriarch, p. 170: ) historia ... habet aliquid ut Arabibus

familiare est.]



[Footnote *: Since this period several new Mahometan authorities

have been adduced to support the authority of Abulpharagius. 

That of, I. Abdollatiph by Professor White: II.  Of Makrizi; I

have seen a Ms. extract from this writer: III.  Of Ibn Chaledun:

and after them Hadschi Chalfa. See Von Hammer, Geschichte der

Assassinen, p. 17.  Reinhard, in a German Dissertation, printed

at Gottingen, 1792, and St. Croix, (Magasin Encyclop. tom. iv. p.

433,) have examined the question.  Among Oriental scholars,

Professor White, M. St. Martin, Von Hammer. and Silv. de Sacy,

consider the fact of the burning the library, by the command of

Omar, beyond question. Compare St. Martin's note. vol. xi. p.

296.  A Mahometan writer brings a similar charge against the

Crusaders.  The library of Tripoli is said to have contained the

incredible number of three millions of volumes.  On the capture

of the city, Count Bertram of St. Giles, entering the first room,

which contained nothing but the Koran, ordered the whole to be

burnt, as the works of the false prophet of Arabia.  See Wilken.

Gesch der Kreux zuge, vol. ii. p. 211. - M.] 

[Footnote 117: This curious anecdote will be vainly sought in the

annals of Eutychius, and the Saracenic history of Elmacin.  The

silence of Abulfeda, Murtadi, and a crowd of Moslems, is less

conclusive from their ignorance of Christian literature.]



[Footnote 118: See Reland, de Jure Militari Mohammedanorum, in

his iiid volume of Dissertations, p. 37.  The reason for not

burning the religious books of the Jews or Christians, is derived

from the respect that is due to the name of God.]



[Footnote 119: Consult the collections of Frensheim (Supplement.

Livian, c. 12, 43) and Usher, (Anal. p. 469.) Livy himself had

styled the Alexandrian library, elegantiae regum curaeque

egregium opus; a liberal encomium, for which he is pertly

criticized by the narrow stoicism of Seneca, (De Tranquillitate

Animi, c. 9,) whose wisdom, on this occasion, deviates into

nonsense.]



[Footnote 120: See this History, vol. iii. p. 146.]



[Footnote 121: Aulus Gellius, (Noctes Atticae, vi. 17,) Ammianus

Marcellinua, (xxii. 16,) and Orosius, (l. vi. c. 15.) They all

speak in the past tense, and the words of Ammianus are remarkably

strong: fuerunt Bibliothecae innumerabiles; et loquitum

monumentorum veterum concinens fides, &c.] 

[Footnote 122: Renaudot answers for versions of the Bible,

Hexapla, Catenoe Patrum, Commentaries, &c., (p. 170.) Our

Alexandrian Ms., if it came from Egypt, and not from

Constantinople or Mount Athos, (Wetstein, Prolegom. ad N. T. p.

8, &c.,) might possibly be among them.]



[Footnote 123: I have often perused with pleasure a chapter of

Quintilian, (Institut. Orator. x. i.,) in which that judicious

critic enumerates and appreciates the series of Greek and Latin

classics.]



[Footnote 124: Such as Galen, Pliny, Aristotle, &c.  On this

subject Wotton (Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, p. 85

- 95) argues, with solid sense, against the lively exotic fancies

of Sir William Temple.  The contempt of the Greeks for Barbaric

science would scarcely admit the Indian or Aethiopic books into

the library of Alexandria; nor is it proved that philosophy has

sustained any real loss from their exclusion.] 

     In the administration of Egypt, ^125 Amrou balanced the

demands of justice and policy; the interest of the people of the

law, who were defended by God; and of the people of the alliance,

who were protected by man.  In the recent tumult of conquest and

deliverance, the tongue of the Copts and the sword of the Arabs

were most adverse to the tranquillity of the province.  To the

former, Amrou declared, that faction and falsehood would be

doubly chastised; by the punishment of the accusers, whom he

should detest as his personal enemies, and by the promotion of

their innocent brethren, whom their envy had labored to injure

and supplant.  He excited the latter by the motives of religion

and honor to sustain the dignity of their character, to endear

themselves by a modest and temperate conduct to God and the

caliph, to spare and protect a people who had trusted to their

faith, and to content themselves with the legitimate and splendid

rewards of their victory.  In the management of the revenue, he

disapproved the simple but oppressive mode of a capitation, and

preferred with reason a proportion of taxes deducted on every

branch from the clear profits of agriculture and commerce.  A

third part of the tribute was appropriated to the annual repairs

of the dikes and canals, so essential to the public welfare. 

Under his administration, the fertility of Egypt supplied the

dearth of Arabia; and a string of camels, laden with corn and

provisions, covered almost without an interval the long road from

Memphis to Medina. ^126 But the genius of Amrou soon renewed the

maritime communication which had been attempted or achieved by

the Pharaohs the Ptolemies, or the Caesars; and a canal, at least

eighty miles in length, was opened from the Nile to the Red Sea.

^* This inland navigation, which would have joined the

Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, was soon discontinued as

useless and dangerous: the throne was removed from Medina to

Damascus, and the Grecian fleets might have explored a passage to

the holy cities of Arabia. ^127 

[Footnote 125: This curious and authentic intelligence of Murtadi

(p. 284 - 289) has not been discovered either by Mr. Ockley, or

by the self- sufficient compilers of the Modern Universal

History.]



[Footnote 126: Eutychius, Annal. tom. ii. p. 320.  Elmacin, Hist.

Saracen. p. 35.]



[Footnote *: Many learned men have doubted the existence of a

communication by water between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean

by the Nile.  Yet the fact is positively asserted by the

ancients.  Diodorus Siculus (l. i. p. 33) speaks of it in the

most distinct manner as existing in his time.  So, also, Strabo,

(l. xvii. p. 805.) Pliny (vol. vi. p. 29) says that the canal

which united the two seas was navigable, (alveus navigabilis.)

The indications furnished by Ptolemy and by the Arabic historian,

Makrisi, show that works were executed under the reign of Hadrian

to repair the canal and extend the navigation; it then received

the name of the River of Trajan Lucian, (in his Pseudomantis, p.

44,) says that he went by water from Alexandria to Clysma, on the

Red Sea. Testimonies of the 6th and of the 8th century show that

the communication was not interrupted at that time. See the

French translation of Strabo, vol. v. p. 382.  St. Martin vol.

xi. p. 299. - M.]



[Footnote 127: On these obscure canals, the reader may try to

satisfy himself from D'Anville, (Mem. sur l'Egypte, p. 108 - 110,

124, 132,) and a learned thesis, maintained and printed at

Strasburg in the year 1770, (Jungendorum marium fluviorumque

molimina, p. 39 - 47, 68 - 70.) Even the supine Turks have

agitated the old project of joining the two seas. (Memoires du

Baron de Tott, tom. iv.)]



     Of his new conquest, the caliph Omar had an imperfect

knowledge from the voice of fame and the legends of the Koran. 

He requested that his lieutenant would place before his eyes the

realm of Pharaoh and the Amalekites; and the answer of Amrou

exhibits a lively and not unfaithful picture of that singular

country. ^128 "O commander of the faithful, Egypt is a compound

of black earth and green plants, between a pulverized mountain

and a red sand.  The distance from Syene to the sea is a month's

journey for a horseman.  Along the valley descends a river, on

which the blessing of the Most High reposes both in the evening

and morning, and which rises and falls with the revolutions of

the sun and moon.  When the annual dispensation of Providence

unlocks the springs and fountains that nourish the earth, the

Nile rolls his swelling and sounding waters through the realm of

Egypt: the fields are overspread by the salutary flood; and the

villages communicate with each other in their painted barks. The

retreat of the inundation deposits a fertilizing mud for the

reception of the various seeds: the crowds of husbandmen who

blacken the land may be compared to a swarm of industrious ants;

and their native indolence is quickened by the lash of the

task-master, and the promise of the flowers and fruits of a

plentiful increase.  Their hope is seldom deceived; but the

riches which they extract from the wheat, the barley, and the

rice, the legumes, the fruit-trees, and the cattle, are unequally

shared between those who labor and those who possess.  According

to the vicissitudes of the seasons, the face of the country is

adorned with a silver wave, a verdant emerald, and the deep

yellow of a golden harvest." ^129 Yet this beneficial order is

sometimes interrupted; and the long delay and sudden swell of the

river in the first year of the conquest might afford some color

to an edifying fable.  It is said, that the annual sacrifice of a

virgin ^130 had been interdicted by the piety of Omar; and that

the Nile lay sullen and inactive in his shallow bed, till the

mandate of the caliph was cast into the obedient stream, which

rose in a single night to the height of sixteen cubits.  The

admiration of the Arabs for their new conquest encouraged the

license of their romantic spirit. We may read, in the gravest

authors, that Egypt was crowded with twenty thousand cities or

villages: ^131 that, exclusive of the Greeks and Arabs, the Copts

alone were found, on the assessment, six millions of tributary

subjects, ^132 or twenty millions of either sex, and of every

age: that three hundred millions of gold or silver were annually

paid to the treasury of the caliphs. ^133 Our reason must be

startled by these extravagant assertions; and they will become

more palpable, if we assume the compass and measure the extent of

habitable ground: a valley from the tropic to Memphis seldom

broader than twelve miles, and the triangle of the Delta, a flat

surface of two thousand one hundred square leagues, compose a

twelfth part of the magnitude of France. ^134 A more accurate

research will justify a more reasonable estimate.  The three

hundred millions, created by the error of a scribe, are reduced

to the decent revenue of four millions three hundred thousand

pieces of gold, of which nine hundred thousand were consumed by

the pay of the soldiers. ^135 Two authentic lists, of the present

and of the twelfth century, are circumscribed within the

respectable number of two thousand seven hundred villages and

towns. ^136 After a long residence at Cairo, a French consul has

ventured to assign about four millions of Mahometans, Christians,

and Jews, for the ample, though not incredible, scope of the

population of Egypt. ^137 

[Footnote 128: A small volume, des Merveilles, &c., de l'Egypte,

composed in the xiiith century by Murtadi of Cairo, and

translated from an Arabic Ms. of Cardinal Mazarin, was published

by Pierre Vatier, Paris, 1666.  The antiquities of Egypt are wild

and legendary; but the writer deserves credit and esteem for his

account of the conquest and geography of his native country, (see

the correspondence of Amrou and Omar, p. 279 - 289.)] 

[Footnote 129: In a twenty years' residence at Cairo, the consul

Maillet had contemplated that varying scene, the Nile, (lettre

ii. particularly p. 70, 75;) the fertility of the land, (lettre

ix.) From a college at Cambridge, the poetic eye of Gray had seen

the same objects with a keener glance: - 

     What wonder in the sultry climes that spread,

     Where Nile, redundant o'er his summer bed,

     From his broad bosom life and verdure flings,

     And broods o'er Egypt with his watery wings:

     If with adventurous oar, and ready sail,

     The dusky people drive before the gale:

     Or on frail floats to neighboring cities ride.

     That rise and glitter o'er the ambient tide.



     (Mason's Works and Memoirs of Gray, p. 199, 200.)]



[Footnote 130: Murtadi, p. 164 - 167.  The reader will not easily

credit a human sacrifice under the Christian emperors, or a

miracle of the successors of Mahomet.]



[Footnote 131: Maillet, Description de l'Egypte, p. 22.  He

mentions this number as the common opinion; and adds, that the

generality of these villages contain two or three thousand

persons, and that many of them are more populous than our large

cities.]



[Footnote 132: Eutych. Annal. tom. ii. p. 308, 311.  The twenty

millions are computed from the following data: one twelfth of

mankind above sixty, one third below sixteen, the proportion of

men to women as seventeen or sixteen, (Recherches sur la

Population de la France, p. 71, 72.) The president Goguet

(Origine des Arts, &c., tom. iii. p. 26, &c.) Bestows

twenty-seven millions on ancient Egypt, because the seventeen

hundred companions of Sesostris were born on the same day.]



[Footnote 133: Elmacin, Hist. Saracen. p. 218; and this gross

lump is swallowed without scruple by D'Herbelot, (Bibliot.

Orient. p. 1031,) Ar. buthnot, (Tables of Ancient Coins, p. 262,)

and De Guignes, (Hist. des Huns, tom. iii. p. 135.) They might

allege the not less extravagant liberality of Appian in favor of

the Ptolemies (in praefat.) of seventy four myriads, 740,000

talents, an annual income of 185, or near 300 millions of pounds

sterling, according as we reckon by the Egyptian or the

Alexandrian talent, (Bernard, de Ponderibus Antiq. p. 186.)]



[Footnote 134: See the measurement of D'Anville, (Mem. sur

l'Egypte, p. 23, &c.) After some peevish cavils, M. Pauw

(Recherches sur les Egyptiens, tom. i. p. 118 - 121) can only

enlarge his reckoning to 2250 square leagues.] 

[Footnote 135: Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexand. p. 334, who

calls the common reading or version of Elmacin, error librarii. 

His own emendation, of 4,300,000 pieces, in the ixth century,

maintains a probable medium between the 3,000,000 which the Arabs

acquired by the conquest of Egypt, idem, p. 168.) and the

2,400,000 which the sultan of Constantinople levied in the last

century, (Pietro della Valle, tom. i. p. 352 Thevenot, part i. p.

824.) Pauw (Recherches, tom. ii. p. 365 - 373) gradually raises

the revenue of the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, and the Caesars, from

six to fifteen millions of German crowns.]



[Footnote 136: The list of Schultens (Index Geograph. ad calcem

Vit. Saladin. p. 5) contains 2396 places; that of D'Anville,

(Mem. sur l'Egypte, p. 29,) from the divan of Cairo, enumerates

2696.]



[Footnote 137: See Maillet, (Description de l'Egypte, p. 28,) who

seems to argue with candor and judgment.  I am much better

satisfied with the observations than with the reading of the

French consul.  He was ignorant of Greek and Latin literature,

and his fancy is too much delighted with the fictions of the

Arabs.  Their best knowledge is collected by Abulfeda, (Descript.

Aegypt. Arab. et Lat. a Joh. David Michaelis, Gottingae, in 4to.,

1776;) and in two recent voyages into Egypt, we are amused by

Savary, and instructed by Volney.  I wish the latter could travel

over the globe.] 

     IV.  The conquest of Africa, from the Nile to the Atlantic

Ocean, ^138 was first attempted by the arms of the caliph Othman.



The pious design was approved by the companions of Mahomet and

the chiefs of the tribes; and twenty thousand Arabs marched from

Medina, with the gifts and the blessing of the commander of the

faithful.  They were joined in the camp of Memphis by twenty

thousand of their countrymen; and the conduct of the war was

intrusted to Abdallah, ^139 the son of Said and the

foster-brother of the caliph, who had lately supplanted the

conqueror and lieutenant of Egypt. Yet the favor of the prince,

and the merit of his favorite, could not obliterate the guilt of

his apostasy.  The early conversion of Abdallah, and his skilful

pen, had recommended him to the important office of transcribing

the sheets of the Koran: he betrayed his trust, corrupted the

text, derided the errors which he had made, and fled to Mecca to

escape the justice, and expose the ignorance, of the apostle. 

After the conquest of Mecca, he fell prostrate at the feet of

Mahomet; his tears, and the entreaties of Othman, extorted a

reluctant pardon; out the prophet declared that he had so long

hesitated, to allow time for some zealous disciple to avenge his

injury in the blood of the apostate.  With apparent fidelity and

effective merit, he served the religion which it was no longer

his interest to desert: his birth and talents gave him an

honorable rank among the Koreish; and, in a nation of cavalry,

Abdallah was renowned as the boldest and most dexterous horseman

of Arabia.  At the head of forty thousand Moslems, he advanced

from Egypt into the unknown countries of the West. The sands of

Barca might be impervious to a Roman legion but the Arabs were

attended by their faithful camels; and the natives of the desert

beheld without terror the familiar aspect of the soil and

climate.  After a painful march, they pitched their tents before

the walls of Tripoli, ^140 a maritime city in which the name, the

wealth, and the inhabitants of the province had gradually

centred, and which now maintains the third rank among the states

of Barbary.  A reenforcement of Greeks was surprised and cut in

pieces on the sea-shore; but the fortifications of Tripoli

resisted the first assaults; and the Saracens were tempted by the

approach of the praefect Gregory ^141 to relinquish the labors of

the siege for the perils and the hopes of a decisive action.  If

his standard was followed by one hundred and twenty thousand men,

the regular bands of the empire must have been lost in the naked

and disorderly crowd of Africans and Moors, who formed the

strength, or rather the numbers, of his host.  He rejected with

indignation the option of the Koran or the tribute; and during

several days the two armies were fiercely engaged from the dawn

of light to the hour of noon, when their fatigue and the

excessive heat compelled them to seek shelter and refreshment in

their respective camps. The daughter of Gregory, a maid of

incomparable beauty and spirit, is said to have fought by his

side: from her earliest youth she was trained to mount on

horseback, to draw the bow, and to wield the cimeter; and the

richness of her arms and apparel were conspicuous in the foremost

ranks of the battle.  Her hand, with a hundred thousand pieces of

gold, was offered for the head of the Arabian general, and the

youths of Africa were excited by the prospect of the glorious

prize.  At the pressing solicitation of his brethren, Abdallah

withdrew his person from the field; but the Saracens were

discouraged by the retreat of their leader, and the repetition of

these equal or unsuccessful conflicts.



[Footnote 138: My conquest of Africa is drawn from two French

interpreters of Arabic literature, Cardonne (Hist. de l'Afrique

et de l'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabes, tom. i. p. 8 - 55)

and Otter, (Hist. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi. p.

111 - 125, and 136.) They derive their principal information from

Novairi, who composed, A.D. 1331 an Encyclopaedia in more than

twenty volumes.  The five general parts successively treat of, 1.

Physics; 2. Man; 3. Animals; 4. Plants; and, 5. History; and the

African affairs are discussed in the vith chapter of the vth

section of this last part, (Reiske, Prodidagmata ad Hagji

Chalifae Tabulas, p. 232 - 234.) Among the older historians who

are quoted by Navairi we may distinguish the original narrative

of a soldier who led the van of the Moslems.]



[Footnote 139: See the history of Abdallah, in Abulfeda (Vit.

Mohammed. p. 108) and Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet, tom. iii. 45 -

48.)]



[Footnote 140: The province and city of Tripoli are described by

Leo Africanus (in Navigatione et Viaggi di Ramusio, tom. i.

Venetia, 1550, fol. 76, verso) and Marmol, (Description de

l'Afrique, tom. ii. p. 562.) The first of these writers was a

Moor, a scholar, and a traveller, who composed or translated his

African geography in a state of captivity at Rome, where he had

assumed the name and religion of Pope Leo X.  In a similar

captivity among the Moors, the Spaniard Marmol, a soldier of

Charles V., compiled his Description of Africa, translated by

D'Ablancourt into French, (Paris, 1667, 3 vols. in 4to.) Marmol

had read and seen, but he is destitute of the curious and

extensive observation which abounds in the original work of Leo

the African.] 

[Footnote 141: Theophanes, who mentions the defeat, rather than

the death, of Gregory.  He brands the praefect with the name: he

had probably assumed the purple, (Chronograph. p. 285.)]



     A noble Arabian, who afterwards became the adversary of Ali,

and the father of a caliph, had signalized his valor in Egypt,

and Zobeir ^142 was the first who planted the scaling-ladder

against the walls of Babylon.  In the African war he was detached

from the standard of Abdallah.  On the news of the battle,

Zobeir, with twelve companions, cut his way through the camp of

the Greeks, and pressed forwards, without tasting either food or

repose, to partake of the dangers of his brethren.  He cast his

eyes round the field: "Where," said he, "is our general?" "In his

tent." "Is the tent a station for the general of the Moslems?"

Abdallah represented with a blush the importance of his own life,

and the temptation that was held forth by the Roman praefect.

"Retort," said Zobeir, "on the infidels their ungenerous attempt.



Proclaim through the ranks that the head of Gregory shall be

repaid with his captive daughter, and the equal sum of one

hundred thousand pieces of gold." To the courage and discretion

of Zobeir the lieutenant of the caliph intrusted the execution of

his own stratagem, which inclined the long-disputed balance in

favor of the Saracens. Supplying by activity and artifice the

deficiency of numbers, a part of their forces lay concealed in

their tents, while the remainder prolonged an irregular skirmish

with the enemy till the sun was high in the heavens.  On both

sides they retired with fainting steps: their horses were

unbridled, their armor was laid aside, and the hostile nations

prepared, or seemed to prepare, for the refreshment of the

evening, and the encounter of the ensuing day.  On a sudden the

charge was sounded; the Arabian camp poured forth a swarm of

fresh and intrepid warriors; and the long line of the Greeks and

Africans was surprised, assaulted, overturned, by new squadrons

of the faithful, who, to the eye of fanaticism, might appear as a

band of angels descending from the sky.  The praefect himself was

slain by the hand of Zobeir: his daughter, who sought revenge and

death, was surrounded and made prisoner; and the fugitives

involved in their disaster the town of Sufetula, to which they

escaped from the sabres and lances of the Arabs. Sufetula was

built one hundred and fifty miles to the south of Carthage: a

gentle declivity is watered by a running stream, and shaded by a

grove of juniper-trees; and, in the ruins of a triumpha arch, a

portico, and three temples of the Corinthian order, curiosity may

yet admire the magnificence of the Romans. ^143 After the fall of

this opulent city, the provincials and Barbarians implored on all

sides the mercy of the conqueror.  His vanity or his zeal might

be flattered by offers of tribute or professions of faith: but

his losses, his fatigues, and the progress of an epidemical

disease, prevented a solid establishment; and the Saracens, after

a campaign of fifteen months, retreated to the confines of Egypt,

with the captives and the wealth of their African expedition. 

The caliph's fifth was granted to a favorite, on the nominal

payment of five hundred thousand pieces of gold; ^144 but the

state was doubly injured by this fallacious transaction, if each

foot-soldier had shared one thousand, and each horseman three

thousand, pieces, in the real division of the plunder.  The

author of the death of Gregory was expected to have claimed the

most precious reward of the victory: from his silence it might be

presumed that he had fallen in the battle, till the tears and

exclamations of the praefect's daughter at the sight of Zobeir

revealed the valor and modesty of that gallant soldier.  The

unfortunate virgin was offered, and almost rejected as a slave,

by her father's murderer, who coolly declared that his sword was

consecrated to the service of religion; and that he labored for a

recompense far above the charms of mortal beauty, or the riches

of this transitory life.  A reward congenial to his temper was

the honorable commission of announcing to the caliph Othman the

success of his arms.  The companions the chiefs, and the people,

were assembled in the mosch of Medina, to hear the interesting

narrative of Zobeir; and as the orator forgot nothing except the

merit of his own counsels and actions, the name of Abdallah was

joined by the Arabians with the heroic names of Caled and Amrou.

^145



[Footnote 142: See in Ockley (Hist. of the Saracens, vol. ii. p.

45) the death of Zobeir, which was honored with the tears of Ali,

against whom he had rebelled.  His valor at the siege of Babylon,

if indeed it be the same person, is mentioned by Eutychius,

(Annal. tom. ii. p. 308)]



[Footnote 143: Shaw's Travels, p. 118, 119.]



[Footnote 144: Mimica emptio, says Abulfeda, erat haec, et mira

donatio; quandoquidem Othman, ejus nomine nummos ex aerario prius

ablatos aerario praestabat, (Annal. Moslem. p. 78.) Elmacin (in

his cloudy version, p. 39) seems to report the same job.  When

the Arabs be sieged the palace of Othman, it stood high in their

catalogue of grievances.]



[Footnote 145: Theophan.  Chronograph. p. 235 edit. Paris.  His

chronology is loose and inaccurate.]





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part VII.



     I should deceive the expectation of the reader, if I passed

in silence the fate of the Alexandrian library, as it is

described by the learned Abulpharagius.  The spirit of Amrou was

more curious and liberal than that of his brethren, and in his

leisure hours, the Arabian chief was pleased with the

conversation of John, the last disciple of Ammonius, and who

derived the surname of Philoponus from his laborious studies of

grammar and philosophy. ^115 Emboldened by this familiar

intercourse, Philoponus presumed to solicit a gift, inestimable

in his opinion, contemptible in that of the Barbarians - the

royal library, which alone, among the spoils of Alexandria, had

not been appropriated by the visit and the seal of the conqueror.



Amrou was inclined to gratify the wish of the grammarian, but his

rigid integrity refused to alienate the minutest object without

the consent of the caliph; and the well-known answer of Omar was

inspired by the ignorance of a fanatic.  "If these writings of

the Greeks agree with the book of God, they are useless, and need

not be preserved: if they disagree, they are pernicious, and

ought to be destroyed." The sentence was executed with blind

obedience: the volumes of paper or parchment were distributed to

the four thousand baths of the city; and such was their

incredible multitude, that six months were barely sufficient for

the consumption of this precious fuel.  Since the Dynasties of

Abulpharagius ^116 have been given to the world in a Latin

version, the tale has been repeatedly transcribed; and every

scholar, with pious indignation, has deplored the irreparable

shipwreck of the learning, the arts, and the genius, of

antiquity.  For my own part, I am strongly tempted to deny both

the fact and the consequences. ^* The fact is indeed marvellous. 

"Read and wonder!" says the historian himself: and the solitary

report of a stranger who wrote at the end of six hundred years on

the confines of Media, is overbalanced by the silence of two

annalist of a more early date, both Christians, both natives of

Egypt, and the most ancient of whom, the patriarch Eutychius, has

amply described the conquest of Alexandria. ^117 The rigid

sentence of Omar is repugnant to the sound and orthodox precept

of the Mahometan casuists they expressly declare, that the

religious books of the Jews and Christians, which are acquired by

the right of war, should never be committed to the flames; and

that the works of profane science, historians or poets,

physicians or philosophers, may be lawfully applied to the use of

the faithful. ^118 A more destructive zeal may perhaps be

attributed to the first successors of Mahomet; yet in this

instance, the conflagration would have speedily expired in the

deficiency of materials. I should not recapitulate the disasters

of the Alexandrian library, the involuntary flame that was

kindled by Caesar in his own defence, ^119 or the mischievous

bigotry of the Christians, who studied to destroy the monuments

of idolatry. ^120 But if we gradually descend from the age of the

Antonines to that of Theodosius, we shall learn from a chain of

contemporary witnesses, that the royal palace and the temple of

Serapis no longer contained the four, or the seven, hundred

thousand volumes, which had been assembled by the curiosity and

magnificence of the Ptolemies. ^121 Perhaps the church and seat

of the patriarchs might be enriched with a repository of books;

but if the ponderous mass of Arian and Monophysite controversy

were indeed consumed in the public baths, ^122 a philosopher may

allow, with a smile, that it was ultimately devoted to the

benefit of mankind.  I sincerely regret the more valuable

libraries which have been involved in the ruin of the Roman

empire; but when I seriously compute the lapse of ages, the waste

of ignorance, and the calamities of war, our treasures, rather

than our losses, are the objects of my surprise.  Many curious

and interesting facts are buried in oblivion: the three great

historians of Rome have been transmitted to our hands in a

mutilated state, and we are deprived of many pleasing

compositions of the lyric, iambic, and dramatic poetry of the

Greeks.  Yet we should gratefully remember, that the mischances

of time and accident have spared the classic works to which the

suffrage of antiquity ^123 had adjudged the first place of genius

and glory: the teachers of ancient knowledge, who are still

extant, had perused and compared the writings of their

predecessors; ^124 nor can it fairly be presumed that any

important truth, any useful discovery in art or nature, has been

snatched away from the curiosity of modern ages.



[Footnote 115: Many treatises of this lover of labor are still

extant, but for readers of the present age, the printed and

unpublished are nearly in the same predicament.  Moses and

Aristotle are the chief objects of his verbose commentaries, one

of which is dated as early as May 10th, A.D. 617, (Fabric.

Bibliot. Graec. tom. ix. p. 458 - 468.) A modern, (John Le

Clerc,) who sometimes assumed the same name was equal to old

Philoponus in diligence, and far superior in good sense and real

knowledge.]



[Footnote 116: Abulpharag. Dynast. p. 114, vers. Pocock.  Audi

quid factum sit et mirare.  It would be endless to enumerate the

moderns who have wondered and believed, but I may distinguish

with honor the rational scepticism of Renaudot, (Hist. Alex.

Patriarch, p. 170: ) historia ... habet aliquid ut Arabibus

familiare est.]



[Footnote *: Since this period several new Mahometan authorities

have been adduced to support the authority of Abulpharagius. 

That of, I. Abdollatiph by Professor White: II.  Of Makrizi; I

have seen a Ms. extract from this writer: III.  Of Ibn Chaledun:

and after them Hadschi Chalfa. See Von Hammer, Geschichte der

Assassinen, p. 17.  Reinhard, in a German Dissertation, printed

at Gottingen, 1792, and St. Croix, (Magasin Encyclop. tom. iv. p.

433,) have examined the question.  Among Oriental scholars,

Professor White, M. St. Martin, Von Hammer. and Silv. de Sacy,

consider the fact of the burning the library, by the command of

Omar, beyond question. Compare St. Martin's note. vol. xi. p.

296.  A Mahometan writer brings a similar charge against the

Crusaders.  The library of Tripoli is said to have contained the

incredible number of three millions of volumes.  On the capture

of the city, Count Bertram of St. Giles, entering the first room,

which contained nothing but the Koran, ordered the whole to be

burnt, as the works of the false prophet of Arabia.  See Wilken.

Gesch der Kreux zuge, vol. ii. p. 211. - M.] 

[Footnote 117: This curious anecdote will be vainly sought in the

annals of Eutychius, and the Saracenic history of Elmacin.  The

silence of Abulfeda, Murtadi, and a crowd of Moslems, is less

conclusive from their ignorance of Christian literature.]



[Footnote 118: See Reland, de Jure Militari Mohammedanorum, in

his iiid volume of Dissertations, p. 37.  The reason for not

burning the religious books of the Jews or Christians, is derived

from the respect that is due to the name of God.]



[Footnote 119: Consult the collections of Frensheim (Supplement.

Livian, c. 12, 43) and Usher, (Anal. p. 469.) Livy himself had

styled the Alexandrian library, elegantiae regum curaeque

egregium opus; a liberal encomium, for which he is pertly

criticized by the narrow stoicism of Seneca, (De Tranquillitate

Animi, c. 9,) whose wisdom, on this occasion, deviates into

nonsense.]



[Footnote 120: See this History, vol. iii. p. 146.]



[Footnote 121: Aulus Gellius, (Noctes Atticae, vi. 17,) Ammianus

Marcellinua, (xxii. 16,) and Orosius, (l. vi. c. 15.) They all

speak in the past tense, and the words of Ammianus are remarkably

strong: fuerunt Bibliothecae innumerabiles; et loquitum

monumentorum veterum concinens fides, &c.] 

[Footnote 122: Renaudot answers for versions of the Bible,

Hexapla, Catenoe Patrum, Commentaries, &c., (p. 170.) Our

Alexandrian Ms., if it came from Egypt, and not from

Constantinople or Mount Athos, (Wetstein, Prolegom. ad N. T. p.

8, &c.,) might possibly be among them.]



[Footnote 123: I have often perused with pleasure a chapter of

Quintilian, (Institut. Orator. x. i.,) in which that judicious

critic enumerates and appreciates the series of Greek and Latin

classics.]



[Footnote 124: Such as Galen, Pliny, Aristotle, &c.  On this

subject Wotton (Reflections on Ancient and Modern Learning, p. 85

- 95) argues, with solid sense, against the lively exotic fancies

of Sir William Temple.  The contempt of the Greeks for Barbaric

science would scarcely admit the Indian or Aethiopic books into

the library of Alexandria; nor is it proved that philosophy has

sustained any real loss from their exclusion.] 

     In the administration of Egypt, ^125 Amrou balanced the

demands of justice and policy; the interest of the people of the

law, who were defended by God; and of the people of the alliance,

who were protected by man.  In the recent tumult of conquest and

deliverance, the tongue of the Copts and the sword of the Arabs

were most adverse to the tranquillity of the province.  To the

former, Amrou declared, that faction and falsehood would be

doubly chastised; by the punishment of the accusers, whom he

should detest as his personal enemies, and by the promotion of

their innocent brethren, whom their envy had labored to injure

and supplant.  He excited the latter by the motives of religion

and honor to sustain the dignity of their character, to endear

themselves by a modest and temperate conduct to God and the

caliph, to spare and protect a people who had trusted to their

faith, and to content themselves with the legitimate and splendid

rewards of their victory.  In the management of the revenue, he

disapproved the simple but oppressive mode of a capitation, and

preferred with reason a proportion of taxes deducted on every

branch from the clear profits of agriculture and commerce.  A

third part of the tribute was appropriated to the annual repairs

of the dikes and canals, so essential to the public welfare. 

Under his administration, the fertility of Egypt supplied the

dearth of Arabia; and a string of camels, laden with corn and

provisions, covered almost without an interval the long road from

Memphis to Medina. ^126 But the genius of Amrou soon renewed the

maritime communication which had been attempted or achieved by

the Pharaohs the Ptolemies, or the Caesars; and a canal, at least

eighty miles in length, was opened from the Nile to the Red Sea.

^* This inland navigation, which would have joined the

Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, was soon discontinued as

useless and dangerous: the throne was removed from Medina to

Damascus, and the Grecian fleets might have explored a passage to

the holy cities of Arabia. ^127 

[Footnote 125: This curious and authentic intelligence of Murtadi

(p. 284 - 289) has not been discovered either by Mr. Ockley, or

by the self- sufficient compilers of the Modern Universal

History.]



[Footnote 126: Eutychius, Annal. tom. ii. p. 320.  Elmacin, Hist.

Saracen. p. 35.]



[Footnote *: Many learned men have doubted the existence of a

communication by water between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean

by the Nile.  Yet the fact is positively asserted by the

ancients.  Diodorus Siculus (l. i. p. 33) speaks of it in the

most distinct manner as existing in his time.  So, also, Strabo,

(l. xvii. p. 805.) Pliny (vol. vi. p. 29) says that the canal

which united the two seas was navigable, (alveus navigabilis.)

The indications furnished by Ptolemy and by the Arabic historian,

Makrisi, show that works were executed under the reign of Hadrian

to repair the canal and extend the navigation; it then received

the name of the River of Trajan Lucian, (in his Pseudomantis, p.

44,) says that he went by water from Alexandria to Clysma, on the

Red Sea. Testimonies of the 6th and of the 8th century show that

the communication was not interrupted at that time. See the

French translation of Strabo, vol. v. p. 382.  St. Martin vol.

xi. p. 299. - M.]



[Footnote 127: On these obscure canals, the reader may try to

satisfy himself from D'Anville, (Mem. sur l'Egypte, p. 108 - 110,

124, 132,) and a learned thesis, maintained and printed at

Strasburg in the year 1770, (Jungendorum marium fluviorumque

molimina, p. 39 - 47, 68 - 70.) Even the supine Turks have

agitated the old project of joining the two seas. (Memoires du

Baron de Tott, tom. iv.)]



     Of his new conquest, the caliph Omar had an imperfect

knowledge from the voice of fame and the legends of the Koran. 

He requested that his lieutenant would place before his eyes the

realm of Pharaoh and the Amalekites; and the answer of Amrou

exhibits a lively and not unfaithful picture of that singular

country. ^128 "O commander of the faithful, Egypt is a compound

of black earth and green plants, between a pulverized mountain

and a red sand.  The distance from Syene to the sea is a month's

journey for a horseman.  Along the valley descends a river, on

which the blessing of the Most High reposes both in the evening

and morning, and which rises and falls with the revolutions of

the sun and moon.  When the annual dispensation of Providence

unlocks the springs and fountains that nourish the earth, the

Nile rolls his swelling and sounding waters through the realm of

Egypt: the fields are overspread by the salutary flood; and the

villages communicate with each other in their painted barks. The

retreat of the inundation deposits a fertilizing mud for the

reception of the various seeds: the crowds of husbandmen who

blacken the land may be compared to a swarm of industrious ants;

and their native indolence is quickened by the lash of the

task-master, and the promise of the flowers and fruits of a

plentiful increase.  Their hope is seldom deceived; but the

riches which they extract from the wheat, the barley, and the

rice, the legumes, the fruit-trees, and the cattle, are unequally

shared between those who labor and those who possess.  According

to the vicissitudes of the seasons, the face of the country is

adorned with a silver wave, a verdant emerald, and the deep

yellow of a golden harvest." ^129 Yet this beneficial order is

sometimes interrupted; and the long delay and sudden swell of the

river in the first year of the conquest might afford some color

to an edifying fable.  It is said, that the annual sacrifice of a

virgin ^130 had been interdicted by the piety of Omar; and that

the Nile lay sullen and inactive in his shallow bed, till the

mandate of the caliph was cast into the obedient stream, which

rose in a single night to the height of sixteen cubits.  The

admiration of the Arabs for their new conquest encouraged the

license of their romantic spirit. We may read, in the gravest

authors, that Egypt was crowded with twenty thousand cities or

villages: ^131 that, exclusive of the Greeks and Arabs, the Copts

alone were found, on the assessment, six millions of tributary

subjects, ^132 or twenty millions of either sex, and of every

age: that three hundred millions of gold or silver were annually

paid to the treasury of the caliphs. ^133 Our reason must be

startled by these extravagant assertions; and they will become

more palpable, if we assume the compass and measure the extent of

habitable ground: a valley from the tropic to Memphis seldom

broader than twelve miles, and the triangle of the Delta, a flat

surface of two thousand one hundred square leagues, compose a

twelfth part of the magnitude of France. ^134 A more accurate

research will justify a more reasonable estimate.  The three

hundred millions, created by the error of a scribe, are reduced

to the decent revenue of four millions three hundred thousand

pieces of gold, of which nine hundred thousand were consumed by

the pay of the soldiers. ^135 Two authentic lists, of the present

and of the twelfth century, are circumscribed within the

respectable number of two thousand seven hundred villages and

towns. ^136 After a long residence at Cairo, a French consul has

ventured to assign about four millions of Mahometans, Christians,

and Jews, for the ample, though not incredible, scope of the

population of Egypt. ^137 

[Footnote 128: A small volume, des Merveilles, &c., de l'Egypte,

composed in the xiiith century by Murtadi of Cairo, and

translated from an Arabic Ms. of Cardinal Mazarin, was published

by Pierre Vatier, Paris, 1666.  The antiquities of Egypt are wild

and legendary; but the writer deserves credit and esteem for his

account of the conquest and geography of his native country, (see

the correspondence of Amrou and Omar, p. 279 - 289.)] 

[Footnote 129: In a twenty years' residence at Cairo, the consul

Maillet had contemplated that varying scene, the Nile, (lettre

ii. particularly p. 70, 75;) the fertility of the land, (lettre

ix.) From a college at Cambridge, the poetic eye of Gray had seen

the same objects with a keener glance: - 

     What wonder in the sultry climes that spread,

     Where Nile, redundant o'er his summer bed,

     From his broad bosom life and verdure flings,

     And broods o'er Egypt with his watery wings:

     If with adventurous oar, and ready sail,

     The dusky people drive before the gale:

     Or on frail floats to neighboring cities ride.

     That rise and glitter o'er the ambient tide.



     (Mason's Works and Memoirs of Gray, p. 199, 200.)]



[Footnote 130: Murtadi, p. 164 - 167.  The reader will not easily

credit a human sacrifice under the Christian emperors, or a

miracle of the successors of Mahomet.]



[Footnote 131: Maillet, Description de l'Egypte, p. 22.  He

mentions this number as the common opinion; and adds, that the

generality of these villages contain two or three thousand

persons, and that many of them are more populous than our large

cities.]



[Footnote 132: Eutych. Annal. tom. ii. p. 308, 311.  The twenty

millions are computed from the following data: one twelfth of

mankind above sixty, one third below sixteen, the proportion of

men to women as seventeen or sixteen, (Recherches sur la

Population de la France, p. 71, 72.) The president Goguet

(Origine des Arts, &c., tom. iii. p. 26, &c.) Bestows

twenty-seven millions on ancient Egypt, because the seventeen

hundred companions of Sesostris were born on the same day.]



[Footnote 133: Elmacin, Hist. Saracen. p. 218; and this gross

lump is swallowed without scruple by D'Herbelot, (Bibliot.

Orient. p. 1031,) Ar. buthnot, (Tables of Ancient Coins, p. 262,)

and De Guignes, (Hist. des Huns, tom. iii. p. 135.) They might

allege the not less extravagant liberality of Appian in favor of

the Ptolemies (in praefat.) of seventy four myriads, 740,000

talents, an annual income of 185, or near 300 millions of pounds

sterling, according as we reckon by the Egyptian or the

Alexandrian talent, (Bernard, de Ponderibus Antiq. p. 186.)]



[Footnote 134: See the measurement of D'Anville, (Mem. sur

l'Egypte, p. 23, &c.) After some peevish cavils, M. Pauw

(Recherches sur les Egyptiens, tom. i. p. 118 - 121) can only

enlarge his reckoning to 2250 square leagues.] 

[Footnote 135: Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alexand. p. 334, who

calls the common reading or version of Elmacin, error librarii. 

His own emendation, of 4,300,000 pieces, in the ixth century,

maintains a probable medium between the 3,000,000 which the Arabs

acquired by the conquest of Egypt, idem, p. 168.) and the

2,400,000 which the sultan of Constantinople levied in the last

century, (Pietro della Valle, tom. i. p. 352 Thevenot, part i. p.

824.) Pauw (Recherches, tom. ii. p. 365 - 373) gradually raises

the revenue of the Pharaohs, the Ptolemies, and the Caesars, from

six to fifteen millions of German crowns.]



[Footnote 136: The list of Schultens (Index Geograph. ad calcem

Vit. Saladin. p. 5) contains 2396 places; that of D'Anville,

(Mem. sur l'Egypte, p. 29,) from the divan of Cairo, enumerates

2696.]



[Footnote 137: See Maillet, (Description de l'Egypte, p. 28,) who

seems to argue with candor and judgment.  I am much better

satisfied with the observations than with the reading of the

French consul.  He was ignorant of Greek and Latin literature,

and his fancy is too much delighted with the fictions of the

Arabs.  Their best knowledge is collected by Abulfeda, (Descript.

Aegypt. Arab. et Lat. a Joh. David Michaelis, Gottingae, in 4to.,

1776;) and in two recent voyages into Egypt, we are amused by

Savary, and instructed by Volney.  I wish the latter could travel

over the globe.] 

     IV.  The conquest of Africa, from the Nile to the Atlantic

Ocean, ^138 was first attempted by the arms of the caliph Othman.



The pious design was approved by the companions of Mahomet and

the chiefs of the tribes; and twenty thousand Arabs marched from

Medina, with the gifts and the blessing of the commander of the

faithful.  They were joined in the camp of Memphis by twenty

thousand of their countrymen; and the conduct of the war was

intrusted to Abdallah, ^139 the son of Said and the

foster-brother of the caliph, who had lately supplanted the

conqueror and lieutenant of Egypt. Yet the favor of the prince,

and the merit of his favorite, could not obliterate the guilt of

his apostasy.  The early conversion of Abdallah, and his skilful

pen, had recommended him to the important office of transcribing

the sheets of the Koran: he betrayed his trust, corrupted the

text, derided the errors which he had made, and fled to Mecca to

escape the justice, and expose the ignorance, of the apostle. 

After the conquest of Mecca, he fell prostrate at the feet of

Mahomet; his tears, and the entreaties of Othman, extorted a

reluctant pardon; out the prophet declared that he had so long

hesitated, to allow time for some zealous disciple to avenge his

injury in the blood of the apostate.  With apparent fidelity and

effective merit, he served the religion which it was no longer

his interest to desert: his birth and talents gave him an

honorable rank among the Koreish; and, in a nation of cavalry,

Abdallah was renowned as the boldest and most dexterous horseman

of Arabia.  At the head of forty thousand Moslems, he advanced

from Egypt into the unknown countries of the West. The sands of

Barca might be impervious to a Roman legion but the Arabs were

attended by their faithful camels; and the natives of the desert

beheld without terror the familiar aspect of the soil and

climate.  After a painful march, they pitched their tents before

the walls of Tripoli, ^140 a maritime city in which the name, the

wealth, and the inhabitants of the province had gradually

centred, and which now maintains the third rank among the states

of Barbary.  A reenforcement of Greeks was surprised and cut in

pieces on the sea-shore; but the fortifications of Tripoli

resisted the first assaults; and the Saracens were tempted by the

approach of the praefect Gregory ^141 to relinquish the labors of

the siege for the perils and the hopes of a decisive action.  If

his standard was followed by one hundred and twenty thousand men,

the regular bands of the empire must have been lost in the naked

and disorderly crowd of Africans and Moors, who formed the

strength, or rather the numbers, of his host.  He rejected with

indignation the option of the Koran or the tribute; and during

several days the two armies were fiercely engaged from the dawn

of light to the hour of noon, when their fatigue and the

excessive heat compelled them to seek shelter and refreshment in

their respective camps. The daughter of Gregory, a maid of

incomparable beauty and spirit, is said to have fought by his

side: from her earliest youth she was trained to mount on

horseback, to draw the bow, and to wield the cimeter; and the

richness of her arms and apparel were conspicuous in the foremost

ranks of the battle.  Her hand, with a hundred thousand pieces of

gold, was offered for the head of the Arabian general, and the

youths of Africa were excited by the prospect of the glorious

prize.  At the pressing solicitation of his brethren, Abdallah

withdrew his person from the field; but the Saracens were

discouraged by the retreat of their leader, and the repetition of

these equal or unsuccessful conflicts.



[Footnote 138: My conquest of Africa is drawn from two French

interpreters of Arabic literature, Cardonne (Hist. de l'Afrique

et de l'Espagne sous la Domination des Arabes, tom. i. p. 8 - 55)

and Otter, (Hist. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. xxi. p.

111 - 125, and 136.) They derive their principal information from

Novairi, who composed, A.D. 1331 an Encyclopaedia in more than

twenty volumes.  The five general parts successively treat of, 1.

Physics; 2. Man; 3. Animals; 4. Plants; and, 5. History; and the

African affairs are discussed in the vith chapter of the vth

section of this last part, (Reiske, Prodidagmata ad Hagji

Chalifae Tabulas, p. 232 - 234.) Among the older historians who

are quoted by Navairi we may distinguish the original narrative

of a soldier who led the van of the Moslems.]



[Footnote 139: See the history of Abdallah, in Abulfeda (Vit.

Mohammed. p. 108) and Gagnier, (Vie de Mahomet, tom. iii. 45 -

48.)]



[Footnote 140: The province and city of Tripoli are described by

Leo Africanus (in Navigatione et Viaggi di Ramusio, tom. i.

Venetia, 1550, fol. 76, verso) and Marmol, (Description de

l'Afrique, tom. ii. p. 562.) The first of these writers was a

Moor, a scholar, and a traveller, who composed or translated his

African geography in a state of captivity at Rome, where he had

assumed the name and religion of Pope Leo X.  In a similar

captivity among the Moors, the Spaniard Marmol, a soldier of

Charles V., compiled his Description of Africa, translated by

D'Ablancourt into French, (Paris, 1667, 3 vols. in 4to.) Marmol

had read and seen, but he is destitute of the curious and

extensive observation which abounds in the original work of Leo

the African.] 

[Footnote 141: Theophanes, who mentions the defeat, rather than

the death, of Gregory.  He brands the praefect with the name: he

had probably assumed the purple, (Chronograph. p. 285.)]



     A noble Arabian, who afterwards became the adversary of Ali,

and the father of a caliph, had signalized his valor in Egypt,

and Zobeir ^142 was the first who planted the scaling-ladder

against the walls of Babylon.  In the African war he was detached

from the standard of Abdallah.  On the news of the battle,

Zobeir, with twelve companions, cut his way through the camp of

the Greeks, and pressed forwards, without tasting either food or

repose, to partake of the dangers of his brethren.  He cast his

eyes round the field: "Where," said he, "is our general?" "In his

tent." "Is the tent a station for the general of the Moslems?"

Abdallah represented with a blush the importance of his own life,

and the temptation that was held forth by the Roman praefect.

"Retort," said Zobeir, "on the infidels their ungenerous attempt.



Proclaim through the ranks that the head of Gregory shall be

repaid with his captive daughter, and the equal sum of one

hundred thousand pieces of gold." To the courage and discretion

of Zobeir the lieutenant of the caliph intrusted the execution of

his own stratagem, which inclined the long-disputed balance in

favor of the Saracens. Supplying by activity and artifice the

deficiency of numbers, a part of their forces lay concealed in

their tents, while the remainder prolonged an irregular skirmish

with the enemy till the sun was high in the heavens.  On both

sides they retired with fainting steps: their horses were

unbridled, their armor was laid aside, and the hostile nations

prepared, or seemed to prepare, for the refreshment of the

evening, and the encounter of the ensuing day.  On a sudden the

charge was sounded; the Arabian camp poured forth a swarm of

fresh and intrepid warriors; and the long line of the Greeks and

Africans was surprised, assaulted, overturned, by new squadrons

of the faithful, who, to the eye of fanaticism, might appear as a

band of angels descending from the sky.  The praefect himself was

slain by the hand of Zobeir: his daughter, who sought revenge and

death, was surrounded and made prisoner; and the fugitives

involved in their disaster the town of Sufetula, to which they

escaped from the sabres and lances of the Arabs. Sufetula was

built one hundred and fifty miles to the south of Carthage: a

gentle declivity is watered by a running stream, and shaded by a

grove of juniper-trees; and, in the ruins of a triumpha arch, a

portico, and three temples of the Corinthian order, curiosity may

yet admire the magnificence of the Romans. ^143 After the fall of

this opulent city, the provincials and Barbarians implored on all

sides the mercy of the conqueror.  His vanity or his zeal might

be flattered by offers of tribute or professions of faith: but

his losses, his fatigues, and the progress of an epidemical

disease, prevented a solid establishment; and the Saracens, after

a campaign of fifteen months, retreated to the confines of Egypt,

with the captives and the wealth of their African expedition. 

The caliph's fifth was granted to a favorite, on the nominal

payment of five hundred thousand pieces of gold; ^144 but the

state was doubly injured by this fallacious transaction, if each

foot-soldier had shared one thousand, and each horseman three

thousand, pieces, in the real division of the plunder.  The

author of the death of Gregory was expected to have claimed the

most precious reward of the victory: from his silence it might be

presumed that he had fallen in the battle, till the tears and

exclamations of the praefect's daughter at the sight of Zobeir

revealed the valor and modesty of that gallant soldier.  The

unfortunate virgin was offered, and almost rejected as a slave,

by her father's murderer, who coolly declared that his sword was

consecrated to the service of religion; and that he labored for a

recompense far above the charms of mortal beauty, or the riches

of this transitory life.  A reward congenial to his temper was

the honorable commission of announcing to the caliph Othman the

success of his arms.  The companions the chiefs, and the people,

were assembled in the mosch of Medina, to hear the interesting

narrative of Zobeir; and as the orator forgot nothing except the

merit of his own counsels and actions, the name of Abdallah was

joined by the Arabians with the heroic names of Caled and Amrou.

^145



[Footnote 142: See in Ockley (Hist. of the Saracens, vol. ii. p.

45) the death of Zobeir, which was honored with the tears of Ali,

against whom he had rebelled.  His valor at the siege of Babylon,

if indeed it be the same person, is mentioned by Eutychius,

(Annal. tom. ii. p. 308)]



[Footnote 143: Shaw's Travels, p. 118, 119.]



[Footnote 144: Mimica emptio, says Abulfeda, erat haec, et mira

donatio; quandoquidem Othman, ejus nomine nummos ex aerario prius

ablatos aerario praestabat, (Annal. Moslem. p. 78.) Elmacin (in

his cloudy version, p. 39) seems to report the same job.  When

the Arabs be sieged the palace of Othman, it stood high in their

catalogue of grievances.]



[Footnote 145: Theophan.  Chronograph. p. 235 edit. Paris.  His

chronology is loose and inaccurate.]





Chapter LI: Conquests By The Arabs.





Part IX.



     On the intelligence of this rapid success, the applause of

Musa degenerated into envy; and he began, not to complain, but to

fear, that Tarik would leave him nothing to subdue.  At the head

of ten thousand Arabs and eight thousand Africans, he passed over

in person from Mauritania to Spain: the first of his companions

were the noblest of the Koreish; his eldest son was left in the

command of Africa; the three younger brethren were of an age and

spirit to second the boldest enterprises of their father.  At his

landing in Algezire, he was respectfully entertained by Count

Julian, who stifled his inward remorse, and testified, both in

words and actions, that the victory of the Arabs had not impaired

his attachment to their cause.  Some enemies yet remained for the

sword of Musa.  The tardy repentance of the Goths had compared

their own numbers and those of the invaders; the cities from

which the march of Tarik had declined considered themselves as

impregnable; and the bravest patriots defended the fortifications

of Seville and Merida.  They were successively besieged and

reduced by the labor of Musa, who transported his camp from the

Boetis to the Anas, from the Guadalquivir to the Guadiana.  When

he beheld the works of Roman magnificence, the bridge, the

aqueducts, the triumphal arches, and the theatre, of the ancient

metropolis of Lusitania, "I should imagine," said he to his four

companions, "that the human race must have united their art and

power in the foundation of this city: happy is the man who shall

become its master!" He aspired to that happiness, but the

Emeritans sustained on this occasion the honor of their descent

from the veteran legionaries of Augustus ^183 Disdaining the

confinement of their walls, they gave battle to the Arabs on the

plain; but an ambuscade rising from the shelter of a quarry, or a

ruin, chastised their indiscretion, and intercepted their return.



The wooden turrets of assault were rolled forwards to the foot of

the rampart; but the defence of Merida was obstinate and long;

and the castle of the martyrs was a perpetual testimony of the

losses of the Moslems.  The constancy of the besieged was at

length subdued by famine and despair; and the prudent victor

disguised his impatience under the names of clemency and esteem. 

The alternative of exile or tribute was allowed; the churches

were divided between the two religions; and the wealth of those

who had fallen in the siege, or retired to Gallicia, was

confiscated as the reward of the faithful.  In the midway between

Merida and Toledo, the lieutenant of Musa saluted the vicegerent

of the caliph, and conducted him to the palace of the Gothic

kings.  Their first interview was cold and formal: a rigid

account was exacted of the treasures of Spain: the character of

Tarik was exposed to suspicion and obloquy; and the hero was

imprisoned, reviled, and ignominiously scourged by the hand, or

the command, of Musa.  Yet so strict was the discipline, so pure

the zeal, or so tame the spirit, of the primitive Moslems, that,

after this public indignity, Tarik could serve and be trusted in

the reduction of the Tarragonest province.  A mosch was erected

at Saragossa, by the liberality of the Koreish: the port of

Barcelona was opened to the vessels of Syria; and the Goths were

pursued beyond the Pyrenaean mountains into their Gallic province

of Septimania or Languedoc. ^184 In the church of St. Mary at

Carcassone, Musa found, but it is improbable that he left, seven

equestrian statues of massy silver; and from his term or column

of Narbonne, he returned on his footsteps to the Gallician and

Lusitanian shores of the ocean.  During the absence of the

father, his son Abdelaziz chastised the insurgents of Seville,

and reduced, from Malaga to Valentia, the sea-coast of the

Mediterranean: his original treaty with the discreet and valiant

Theodemir ^185 will represent the manners and policy of the

times.  "The conditions of peace agreed and sworn between

Abdelaziz, the son of Musa, the son of Nassir, and Theodemir

prince of the Goths.  In the name of the most merciful God,

Abdelaziz makes peace on these conditions: that Theodemir shall

not be disturbed in his principality; nor any injury be offered

to the life or property, the wives and children, the religion and

temples, of the Christians: that Theodemir shall freely deliver

his seven ^* cities, Orihuela, Valentola, Alicanti Mola,

Vacasora, Bigerra, (now Bejar,) Ora, (or Opta,) and Lorca: that

he shall not assist or entertain the enemies of the caliph, but

shall faithfully communicate his knowledge of their hostile

designs: that himself, and each of the Gothic nobles, shall

annually pay one piece of gold, four measures of wheat, as many

of barley, with a certain proportion of honey, oil, and vinegar;

and that each of their vassals shall be taxed at one moiety of

the said imposition.  Given the fourth of Regeb, in the year of

the Hegira ninety- four, and subscribed with the names of four

Mussulman witnesses." ^186 Theodemir and his subjects were

treated with uncommon lenity; but the rate of tribute appears to

have fluctuated from a tenth to a fifth, according to the

submission or obstinacy of the Christians. ^187 In this

revolution, many partial calamities were inflicted by the carnal

or religious passions of the enthusiasts: some churches were

profaned by the new worship: some relics or images were

confounded with idols: the rebels were put to the sword; and one

town (an obscure place between Cordova and Seville) was razed to

its foundations.  Yet if we compare the invasion of Spain by the

Goths, or its recovery by the kings of Castile and Arragon, we

must applaud the moderation and discipline of the Arabian

conquerors.



[Footnote 183: The honorable relics of the Cantabrian war (Dion

Cassius, l. liii p. 720) were planted in this metropolis of

Lusitania, perhaps of Spain, (submittit cui tota suos Hispania

fasces.) Nonius (Hispania, c. 31, p. 106 - 110) enumerates the

ancient structures, but concludes with a sigh: Urbs haec olim

nobilissima ad magnam incolarum infrequentiam delapsa est, et

praeter priscae claritatis ruinas nihil ostendit.]



[Footnote 184: Both the interpreters of Novairi, De Guignes

(Hist. des Huns, tom. i. p. 349) and Cardonne, (Hist. de

l'Afrique et de l'Espagne, tom. i. p. 93, 94, 104, 135,) lead

Musa into the Narbonnese Gaul.  But I find no mention of this

enterprise, either in Roderic of Toledo, or the Mss. of the

Escurial, and the invasion of the Saracens is postponed by a

French chronicle till the ixth year after the conquest of Spain,

A.D. 721, (Pagi, Critica, tom. iii. p. 177, 195.  Historians of

France, tom. iii.) I much question whether Musa ever passed the

Pyrenees.]



[Footnote 185: Four hundred years after Theodemir, his

territories of Murcia and Carthagena retain in the Nubian

geographer Edrisi (p, 154, 161) the name of Tadmir, (D'Anville,

Etats de l'Europe, p. 156.  Pagi, tom. iii. p. 174.) In the

present decay of Spanish agriculture, Mr. Swinburne (Travels into

Spain, p. 119) surveyed with pleasure the delicious valley from

Murcia to Orihuela, four leagues and a half of the finest corn

pulse, lucerne, oranges, &c.] 

[Footnote *: Gibbon has made eight cities: in Conde's translation

Bigera does not appear. - M.]



[Footnote 186: See the treaty in Arabic and Latin, in the

Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana, tom. ii. p. 105, 106.  It is signed

the 4th of the month of Regeb, A. H. 94, the 5th of April, A.D.

713; a date which seems to prolong the resistance of Theodemir,

and the government of Musa.]



[Footnote 187: From the history of Sandoval, p. 87.  Fleury

(Hist. Eccles. tom. ix. p. 261) has given the substance of

another treaty concluded A Ae. C. 782, A.D. 734, between an

Arabian chief and the Goths and Romans, of the territory of

Conimbra in Portugal.  The tax of the churches is fixed at

twenty-five pounds of gold; of the monasteries, fifty; of the

cathedrals, one hundred; the Christians are judged by their

count, but in capital cases he must consult the alcaide.  The

church doors must be shut, and they must respect the name of

Mahomet.  I have not the original before me; it would confirm or

destroy a dark suspicion, that the piece has been forged to

introduce the immunity of a neighboring convent.]



     The exploits of Musa were performed in the evening of life,

though he affected to disguise his age by coloring with a red

powder the whiteness of his beard.  But in the love of action and

glory, his breast was still fired with the ardor of youth; and

the possession of Spain was considered only as the first step to

the monarchy of Europe.  With a powerful armament by sea and

land, he was preparing to repass the Pyrenees, to extinguish in

Gaul and Italy the declining kingdoms of the Franks and Lombards,

and to preach the unity of God on the altar of the Vatican.  From

thence, subduing the Barbarians of Germany, he proposed to follow

the course of the Danube from its source to the Euxine Sea, to

overthrow the Greek or Roman empire of Constantinople, and

returning from Europe to Asia, to unite his new acquisitions with

Antioch and the provinces of Syria. ^188 But his vast enterprise,

perhaps of easy execution, must have seemed extravagant to vulgar

minds; and the visionary conqueror was soon reminded of his

dependence and servitude.  The friends of Tarik had effectually

stated his services and wrongs: at the court of Damascus, the

proceedings of Musa were blamed, his intentions were suspected,

and his delay in complying with the first invitation was

chastised by a harsher and more peremptory summons. An intrepid

messenger of the caliph entered his camp at Lugo in Gallicia, and

in the presence of the Saracens and Christians arrested the

bridle of his horse.  His own loyalty, or that of his troops,

inculcated the duty of obedience: and his disgrace was alleviated

by the recall of his rival, and the permission of investing with

his two governments his two sons, Abdallah and Abdelaziz.  His

long triumph from Ceuta to Damascus displayed the spoils of

Africa and the treasures of Spain: four hundred Gothic nobles,

with gold coronets and girdles, were distinguished in his train;

and the number of male and female captives, selected for their

birth or beauty, was computed at eighteen, or even at thirty,

thousand persons.  As soon as he reached Tiberias in Palestine,

he was apprised of the sickness and danger of the caliph, by a

private message from Soliman, his brother and presumptive heir;

who wished to reserve for his own reign the spectacle of victory.



Had Walid recovered, the delay of Musa would have been criminal:

he pursued his march, and found an enemy on the throne.  In his

trial before a partial judge against a popular antagonist, he was

convicted of vanity and falsehood; and a fine of two hundred

thousand pieces of gold either exhausted his poverty or proved

his rapaciousness.  The unworthy treatment of Tarik was revenged

by a similar indignity; and the veteran commander, after a public

whipping, stood a whole day in the sun before the palace gate,

till he obtained a decent exile, under the pious name of a

pilgrimage to Mecca.  The resentment of the caliph might have

been satiated with the ruin of Musa; but his fears demanded the

extirpation of a potent and injured family.  A sentence of death

was intimated with secrecy and speed to the trusty servants of

the throne both in Africa and Spain; and the forms, if not the

substance, of justice were superseded in this bloody execution. 

In the mosch or palace of Cordova, Abdelaziz was slain by the

swords of the conspirators; they accused their governor of

claiming the honors of royalty; and his scandalous marriage with

Egilona, the widow of Roderic, offended the prejudices both of

the Christians and Moslems.  By a refinement of cruelty, the head

of the son was presented to the father, with an insulting

question, whether he acknowledged the features of the rebel?  "I

know his features," he exclaimed with indignation: "I assert his

innocence; and I imprecate the same, a juster fate, against the

authors of his death." The age and despair of Musa raised him

above the power of kings; and he expired at Mecca of the anguish

of a broken heart.  His rival was more favorably treated: his

services were forgiven; and Tarik was permitted to mingle with

the crowd of slaves. ^189 I am ignorant whether Count Julian was

rewarded with the death which he deserved indeed, though not from

the hands of the Saracens; but the tale of their ingratitude to

the sons of Witiza is disproved by the most unquestionable

evidence.  The two royal youths were reinstated in the private

patrimony of their father; but on the decease of Eba, the elder,

his daughter was unjustly despoiled of her portion by the

violence of her uncle Sigebut.  The Gothic maid pleaded her cause

before the caliph Hashem, and obtained the restitution of her

inheritance; but she was given in marriage to a noble Arabian,

and their two sons, Isaac and Ibrahim, were received in Spain

with the consideration that was due to their origin and riches.



[Footnote 188: This design, which is attested by several Arabian

historians, (Cardonne, tom. i. p. 95, 96,) may be compared with

that of Mithridates, to march from the Crimaea to Rome; or with

that of Caesar, to conquer the East, and return home by the

North; and all three are perhaps surpassed by the real and

successful enterprise of Hannibal.]



[Footnote 189: I much regret our loss, or my ignorance, of two

Arabic works of the viiith century, a Life of Musa, and a poem on

the exploits of Tarik. Of these authentic pieces, the former was

composed by a grandson of Musa, who had escaped from the massacre

of his kindred; the latter, by the vizier of the first

Abdalrahman, caliph of Spain, who might have conversed with some

of the veterans of the conqueror, (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, tom.

ii. p. 36, 139.)] 

     A province is assimilated to the victorious state by the

introduction of strangers and the imitative spirit of the

natives; and Spain, which had been successively tinctured with

Punic, and Roman, and Gothic blood, imbibed, in a few

generations, the name and manners of the Arabs.  The first

conquerors, and the twenty successive lieutenants of the caliphs,

were attended by a numerous train of civil and military

followers, who preferred a distant fortune to a narrow home: the

private and public interest was promoted by the establishment of

faithful colonies; and the cities of Spain were proud to

commemorate the tribe or country of their Eastern progenitors. 

The victorious though motley bands of Tarik and Musa asserted, by

the name of Spaniards, their original claim of conquest; yet they

allowed their brethren of Egypt to share their establishments of

Murcia and Lisbon.  The royal legion of Damascus was planted at

Cordova; that of Emesa at Seville; that of Kinnisrin or Chalcis

at Jaen; that of Palestine at Algezire and Medina Sidonia.  The

natives of Yemen and Persia were scattered round Toledo and the

inland country, and the fertile seats of Grenada were bestowed on

ten thousand horsemen of Syria and Irak, the children of the

purest and most noble of the Arabian tribes. ^190 A spirit of

emulation, sometimes beneficial, more frequently dangerous, was

nourished by these hereditary factions.  Ten years after the

conquest, a map of the province was presented to the caliph: the

seas, the rivers, and the harbors, the inhabitants and cities,

the climate, the soil, and the mineral productions of the earth.

^191 In the space of two centuries, the gifts of nature were

improved by the agriculture, ^192 the manufactures, and the

commerce, of an industrious people; and the effects of their

diligence have been magnified by the idleness of their fancy. 

The first of the Ommiades who reigned in Spain solicited the

support of the Christians; and in his edict of peace and

protection, he contents himself with a modest imposition of ten

thousand ounces of gold, ten thousand pounds of silver, ten

thousand horses, as many mules, one thousand cuirasses, with an

equal number of helmets and lances. ^193 The most powerful of his

successors derived from the same kingdom the annual tribute of

twelve millions and forty-five thousand dinars or pieces of gold,

about six millions of sterling money; ^194 a sum which, in the

tenth century, most probably surpassed the united revenues of the

Christians monarchs.  His royal seat of Cordova contained six

hundred moschs, nine hundred baths, and two hundred thousand

houses; he gave laws to eighty cities of the first, to three

hundred of the second and third order; and the fertile banks of

the Guadalquivir were adorned with twelve thousand villages and

hamlets.  The Arabs might exaggerate the truth, but they created

and they describe the most prosperous aera of the riches, the

cultivation, and the populousness of Spain. ^195



[Footnote 190: Bibliot. Arab. Hispana, tom. ii. p. 32, 252.  The

former of these quotations is taken from a Biographia Hispanica,

by an Arabian of Valentia, (see the copious Extracts of Casiri,

tom. ii. p. 30 - 121;) and the latter from a general Chronology

of the Caliphs, and of the African and Spanish Dynasties, with a

particular History of the kingdom of Grenada, of which Casiri has

given almost an entire version, (Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, tom.

ii. p. 177 - 319.) The author, Ebn Khateb, a native of Grenada,

and a contemporary of Novairi and Abulfeda, (born A.D. 1313, died

A.D. 1374,) was an historian, geographer, physician, poet, &c.,

(tom. ii. p. 71, 72.)] 

[Footnote 191: Cardonne, Hist. de l'Afrique et de l'Espagne, tom.

i. p. 116, 117.]



[Footnote 192: A copious treatise of husbandry, by an Arabian of

Seville, in the xiith century, is in the Escurial library, and

Casiri had some thoughts of translating it.  He gives a list of

the authors quoted, Arabs as well as Greeks, Latins, &c.; but it

is much if the Andalusian saw these strangers through the medium

of his countryman Columella, (Casiri, Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana,

tom. i. p. 323 - 338.)]



[Footnote 193: Bibliot. Arabico-Hispana, tom. ii. p. 104.  Casiri

translates the original testimony of the historian Rasis, as it

is alleged in the Arabic Biographia Hispanica, pars ix.  But I am

most exceedingly surprised at the address, Principibus

caeterisque Christianis, Hispanis suis Castellae.  The name of

Castellae was unknown in the viiith century; the kingdom was not

erected till the year 1022, a hundred years after the time of

Rasis, (Bibliot. tom. ii. p. 330,) and the appellation was always

expressive, not of a tributary province, but of a line of castles

independent of the Moorish yoke, (D'Anville, Etats de l'Europe,

p. 166 - 170.) Had Casiri been a critic, he would have cleared a

difficulty, perhaps of his own making.] 

[Footnote 194: Cardonne, tom. i. p. 337, 338.  He computes the

revenue at 130,000,000 of French livres.  The entire picture of

peace and prosperity relieves the bloody uniformity of the

Moorish annals.]



[Footnote 195: I am happy enough to possess a splendid and

interesting work which has only been distributed in presents by

the court of Madrid Bibliotheca Arabico-Hispana Escurialensis,

opera et studio Michaelis Casiri, Syro Maronitoe.  Matriti, in

folio, tomus prior, 1760, tomus posterior, 1770.  The execution

of this work does honor to the Spanish press; the Mss., to the

number of MDCCCLI., are judiciously classed by the editor, and

his copious extracts throw some light on the Mahometan literature

and history of Spain. These relics are now secure, but the task

has been supinely delayed, till, in the year 1671, a fire

consumed the greatest part of the Escurial library, rich in the

spoils of Grenada and Morocco.



     Note: Compare the valuable work of Conde, Historia de la

Dominacion de las Arabes en Espana.  Madrid, 1820. - M.]



     The wars of the Moslems were sanctified by the prophet; but

among the various precepts and examples of his life, the caliphs

selected the lessons of toleration that might tend to disarm the

resistance of the unbelievers. Arabia was the temple and

patrimony of the God of Mahomet; but he beheld with less jealousy

and affection the nations of the earth.  The polytheists and

idolaters, who were ignorant of his name, might be lawfully

extirpated by his votaries; ^196 but a wise policy supplied the

obligation of justice; and after some acts of intolerant zeal,

the Mahometan conquerors of Hindostan have spared the pagods of

that devout and populous country.  The disciples of Abraham, of

Moses, and of Jesus, were solemnly invited to accept the more

perfect revelation of Mahomet; but if they preferred the payment

of a moderate tribute, they were entitled to the freedom of

conscience and religious worship. ^197 In a field of battle the

forfeit lives of the prisoners were redeemed by the profession of

Islam; the females were bound to embrace the religion of their

masters, and a race of sincere proselytes was gradually

multiplied by the education of the infant captives.  But the

millions of African and Asiatic converts, who swelled the native

band of the faithful Arabs, must have been allured, rather than

constrained, to declare their belief in one God and the apostle

of God.  By the repetition of a sentence and the loss of a

foreskin, the subject or the slave, the captive or the criminal,

arose in a moment the free and equal companion of the victorious

Moslems. Every sin was expiated, every engagement was dissolved:

the vow of celibacy was superseded by the indulgence of nature;

the active spirits who slept in the cloister were awakened by the

trumpet of the Saracens; and in the convulsion of the world,

every member of a new society ascended to the natural level of

his capacity and courage.  The minds of the multitude were

tempted by the invisible as well as temporal blessings of the

Arabian prophet; and charity will hope that many of his

proselytes entertained a serious conviction of the truth and

sanctity of his revelation.  In the eyes of an inquisitive

polytheist, it must appear worthy of the human and the divine

nature.  More pure than the system of Zoroaster, more liberal

than the law of Moses, the religion of Mahomet might seem less

inconsistent with reason than the creed of mystery and

superstition, which, in the seventh century, disgraced the

simplicity of the gospel.



[Footnote 196: The Harbii, as they are styled, qui tolerari

nequeunt, are, 1. Those who, besides God, worship the sun, moon,

or idols.  2. Atheists, Utrique, quamdiu princeps aliquis inter

Mohammedanos superest, oppugnari debent donec religionem

amplectantur, nec requies iis concedenda est, nec pretium

acceptandum pro obtinenda conscientiae libertate, (Reland,

Dissertat. x. de Jure Militari Mohammedan. tom. iii. p. 14;) a

rigid theory!] 

[Footnote 197: The distinction between a proscribed and a

tolerated sect, between the Harbii and the people of the Book,

the believers in some divine revelation, is correctly defined in

the conversation of the caliph Al Mamum with the idolaters or

Sabaeans of Charrae, (Hottinger, Hist. Orient. p. 107, 108.)]



     In the extensive provinces of Persia and Africa, the

national religion has been eradicated by the Mahometan faith. 

The ambiguous theology of the Magi stood alone among the sects of

the East; but the profane writings of Zoroaster ^198 might, under

the reverend name of Abraham, be dexterously connected with the

chain of divine revelation.  Their evil principle, the daemon

Ahriman, might be represented as the rival, or as the creature,

of the God of light.  The temples of Persia were devoid of

images; but the worship of the sun and of fire might be

stigmatized as a gross and criminal idolatry. ^199 The milder

sentiment was consecrated by the practice of Mahomet ^200 and the

prudence of the caliphs; the Magians or Ghebers were ranked with

the Jews and Christians among the people of the written law; ^201

and as late as the third century of the Hegira, the city of Herat

will afford a lively contrast of private zeal and public

toleration. ^202 Under the payment of an annual tribute, the

Mahometan law secured to the Ghebers of Herat their civil and

religious liberties: but the recent and humble mosch was

overshadowed by the antique splendor of the adjoining temple of

fire.  A fanatic Iman deplored, in his sermons, the scandalous

neighborhood, and accused the weakness or indifference of the

faithful. Excited by his voice, the people assembled in tumult;

the two houses of prayer were consumed by the flames, but the

vacant ground was immediately occupied by the foundations of a

new mosch.  The injured Magi appealed to the sovereign of

Chorasan; he promised justice and relief; when, behold! four

thousand citizens of Herat, of a grave character and mature age,

unanimously swore that the idolatrous fane had never existed; the

inquisition was silenced and their conscience was satisfied (says

the historian Mirchond ^203) with this holy and meritorious

perjury. ^204 But the greatest part of the temples of Persia were

ruined by the insensible and general desertion of their votaries.



It was insensible, since it is not accompanied with any memorial

of time or place, of persecution or resistance. It was general,

since the whole realm, from Shiraz to Samarcand, imbibed the

faith of the Koran; and the preservation of the native tongue

reveals the descent of the Mahometans of Persia. ^205 In the

mountains and deserts, an obstinate race of unbelievers adhered

to the superstition of their fathers; and a faint tradition of

the Magian theology is kept alive in the province of Kirman,

along the banks of the Indus, among the exiles of Surat, and in

the colony which, in the last century, was planted by Shaw Abbas

at the gates of Ispahan.  The chief pontiff has retired to Mount

Elbourz, eighteen leagues from the city of Yezd: the perpetual

fire (if it continues to burn) is inaccessible to the profane;

but his residence is the school, the oracle, and the pilgrimage

of the Ghebers, whose hard and uniform features attest the

unmingled purity of their blood.  Under the jurisdiction of their

elders, eighty thousand families maintain an innocent and

industrious life: their subsistence is derived from some curious

manufactures and mechanic trades; and they cultivate the earth

with the fervor of a religious duty.  Their ignorance withstood

the despotism of Shaw Abbas, who demanded with threats and

tortures the prophetic books of Zoroaster; and this obscure

remnant of the Magians is spared by the moderation or contempt of

their present sovereigns. ^206 

[Footnote 198: The Zend or Pazend, the bible of the Ghebers, is

reckoned by themselves, or at least by the Mahometans, among the

ten books which Abraham received from heaven; and their religion

is honorably styled the religion of Abraham, (D'Herblot, Bibliot.

Orient. p. 701; Hyde, de Religione veterum Persarum, c, iii. p.

27, 28, &c.) I much fear that we do not possess any pure and free

description of the system of Zoroaster. ^* Dr. Prideaux

(Connection, vol. i. p. 300, octavo) adopts the opinion, that he

had been the slave and scholar of some Jewish prophet in the

captivity of Babylon.  Perhaps the Persians, who have been the

masters of the Jews, would assert the honor, a poor honor, of

being their masters.



     [Footnote *: Whatever the real age of the Zendavesta,

published by Anquetil du Perron, whether of the time of Ardeschir

Babeghan, according to Mr. Erskine, or of much higher antiquity,

it may be considered, I conceive, both a "pure and a free,"

though imperfect, description of Zoroastrianism; particularly

with the illustrations of the original translator, and of the

German Kleuker - M.]



[Footnote 199: The Arabian Nights, a faithful and amusing picture

of the Oriental world, represent in the most odious colors of the

Magians, or worshippers of fire, to whom they attribute the

annual sacrifice of a Mussulman.  The religion of Zoroaster has

not the least affinity with that of the Hindoos, yet they are

often confounded by the Mahometans; and the sword of Timour was

sharpened by this mistake, (Hist. de Timour Bec, par Cherefeddin

Ali Yezdi, l. v.]



[Footnote 200: Vie de Mahomet, par Gagnier, tom. iii. p. 114,

115.)] 

[Footnote 201: Hae tres sectae, Judaei, Christiani, et qui inter

Persas Magorum institutis addicti sunt, populi libri dicuntur,

(Reland, Dissertat. tom. iii. p. 15.) The caliph Al Mamun

confirms this honorable distinction in favor of the three sects,

with the vague and equivocal religion of the Sabaeans, under

which the ancient polytheists of Charrae were allowed to shelter

their idolatrous worship, (Hottinger, Hist. Orient p. 167, 168.)]



[Footnote 202: This singular story is related by D'Herbelot,

(Bibliot. Orient. p 448, 449,) on the faith of Khondemir, and by

Mirchond himself, (Hist priorum Regum Persarum, &c., p. 9, 10,

not. p. 88, 89.)]



[Footnote 203: Mirchond, (Mohammed Emir Khoondah Shah,) a native

of Herat, composed in the Persian language a general history of

the East, from the creation to the year of the Hegira 875, (A.D.

1471.) In the year 904 (A.D. 1498) the historian obtained the

command of a princely library, and his applauded work, in seven

or twelve parts, was abbreviated in three volumes by his son

Khondemir, A. H. 927, A.D. 1520.  The two writers, most

accurately distinguished by Petit de la Croix, (Hist. de

Genghizcan, p.537, 538, 544, 545,) are loosely confounded by

D'Herbelot, (p. 358, 410, 994, 995: ) but his numerous extracts,

under the improper name of Khondemir, belong to the father rather

than the son.  The historian of Genghizcan refers to a Ms. of

Mirchond, which he received from the hands of his friend

D'Herbelot himself.  A curious fragment (the Taherian and

Soffarian Dynasties) has been lately published in Persic and

Latin, (Viennae, 1782, in 4to., cum notis Bernard de Jenisch;)

and the editor allows us to hope for a continuation of Mirchond.]



[Footnote 204: Quo testimonio boni se quidpiam praestitisse

opinabantur. Yet Mirchond must have condemned their zeal, since

he approved the legal toleration of the Magi, cui (the fire

temple) peracto singulis annis censu uti sacra Mohammedis lege

cautum, ab omnibus molestiis ac oneribus libero esse licuit.]



[Footnote 205: The last Magian of name and power appears to be

Mardavige the Dilemite, who, in the beginning of the 10th

century, reigned in the northern provinces of Persia, near the

Caspian Sea, (D'Herbelot, Bibliot. Orient. p. 355.) But his

soldiers and successors, the Bowides either professed or embraced

the Mahometan faith; and under their dynasty (A.D. 933 - 1020) I

should say the fall of the religion of Zoroaster.]



[Footnote 206: The present state of the Ghebers in Persia is

taken from Sir John Chardin, not indeed the most learned, but the

most judicious and inquisitive of our modern travellers, (Voyages

en Perse, tom. ii. p. 109, 179 - 187, in 4to.) His brethren,

Pietro della Valle, Olearius, Thevenot, Tavernier, &c., whom I

have fruitlessly searched, had neither eyes nor attention for

this interesting people.]



     The Northern coast of Africa is the only land in which the

light of the gospel, after a long and perfect establishment, has

been totally extinguished. The arts, which had been taught by

Carthage and Rome, were involved in a cloud of ignorance; the

doctrine of Cyprian and Augustin was no longer studied. Five

hundred episcopal churches were overturned by the hostile fury of

the Donatists, the Vandals, and the Moors.  The zeal and numbers

of the clergy declined; and the people, without discipline, or

knowledge, or hope, submissively sunk under the yoke of the

Arabian prophet Within fifty years after the expulsion of the

Greeks, a lieutenant of Africa informed the caliph that the

tribute of the infidels was abolished by their conversion; ^207

and, though he sought to disguise his fraud and rebellion, his

specious pretence was drawn from the rapid and extensive progress

of the Mahometan faith.  In the next age, an extraordinary

mission of five bishops was detached from Alexandria to Cairoan. 

They were ordained by the Jacobite patriarch to cherish and

revive the dying embers of Christianity: ^208 but the

interposition of a foreign prelate, a stranger to the Latins, an

enemy to the Catholics, supposes the decay and dissolution of the

African hierarchy.  It was no longer the time when the successor

of St. Cyprian, at the head of a numerous synod, could maintain

an equal contest with the ambition of the Roman pontiff.  In the

eleventh century, the unfortunate priest who was seated on the

ruins of Carthage implored the arms and the protection of the

Vatican; and he bitterly complains that his naked body had been

scourged by the Saracens, and that his authority was disputed by

the four suffragans, the tottering pillars of his throne.  Two

epistles of Gregory the Seventh ^209 are destined to soothe the

distress of the Catholics and the pride of a Moorish prince. The

pope assures the sultan that they both worship the same God, and

may hope to meet in the bosom of Abraham; but the complaint that

three bishops could no longer be found to consecrate a brother,

announces the speedy and inevitable ruin of the episcopal order. 

The Christians of Africa and Spain had long since submitted to

the practice of circumcision and the legal abstinence from wine

and pork; and the name of Mozarabes ^210 (adoptive Arabs) was

applied to their civil or religious conformity. ^211 About the

middle of the twelfth century, the worship of Christ and the

succession of pastors were abolished along the coast of Barbary,

and in the kingdoms of Cordova and Seville, of Valencia and

Grenada. ^212 The throne of the Almohades, or Unitarians, was

founded on the blindest fanaticism, and their extraordinary rigor

might be provoked or justified by the recent victories and

intolerant zeal of the princes of Sicily and Castille, of Arragon

and Portugal.  The faith of the Mozarabes was occasionally

revived by the papal missionaries; and, on the landing of Charles

the Fifth, some families of Latin Christians were encouraged to

rear their heads at Tunis and Algiers. But the seed of the gospel

was quickly eradicated, and the long province from Tripoli to the

Atlantic has lost all memory of the language and religion of

Rome. ^213 

[Footnote 207: The letter of Abdoulrahman, governor or tyrant of

Africa, to the caliph Aboul Abbas, the first of the Abbassides,

is dated A. H. 132 Cardonne, Hist. de l'Afrique et de l'Espagne,

tom. i. p. 168.)] 

[Footnote 208: Bibliotheque Orientale, p. 66.  Renaudot, Hist.

Patriarch. Alex. p. 287, 288.]



[Footnote 209: Among the Epistles of the Popes, see Leo IX.

epist. 3; Gregor. VII. l. i. epist. 22, 23, l. iii. epist. 19,

20, 21; and the criticisms of Pagi, (tom. iv. A.D. 1053, No. 14,

A.D. 1073, No. 13,) who investigates the name and family of the

Moorish prince, with whom the proudest of the Roman pontiffs so

politely corresponds.]



[Footnote 210: Mozarabes, or Mostarabes, adscititii, as it is

interpreted in Latin, (Pocock, Specimen Hist. Arabum, p. 39, 40. 

Bibliot. Arabico- Hispana, tom. ii. p. 18.) The Mozarabic

liturgy, the ancient ritual of the church of Toledo, has been

attacked by the popes, and exposed to the doubtful trials of the

sword and of fire, (Marian. Hist. Hispan. tom. i. l. ix. c. 18,

p. 378.) It was, or rather it is, in the Latin tongue; yet in the

xith century it was found necessary (A. Ae. C. 1687, A.D. 1039)

to transcribe an Arabic version of the canons of the councils of

Spain, (Bibliot. Arab. Hisp. tom. i. p. 547,) for the use of the

bishops and clergy in the Moorish kingdoms.] 

[Footnote 211: About the middle of the xth century, the clergy of

Cordova was reproached with this criminal compliance, by the

intrepid envoy of the Emperor Otho I., (Vit. Johan. Gorz, in

Secul. Benedict. V. No. 115, apud Fleury, Hist. Eccles. tom. xii.

p. 91.)]



[Footnote 212: Pagi, Critica, tom. iv. A.D. 1149, No. 8, 9.  He

justly observes, that when Seville, &c., were retaken by

Ferdinand of Castille, no Christians, except captives, were found

in the place; and that the Mozarabic churches of Africa and

Spain, described by James a Vitriaco, A.D. 1218, (Hist. Hierosol.

c. 80, p. 1095, in Gest. Dei per Francos,) are copied from some

older book.  I shall add, that the date of the Hegira 677 (A.D.

1278) must apply to the copy, not the composition, of a treatise

of a jurisprudence, which states the civil rights of the

Christians of Cordova, (Bibliot. Arab. Hisp. tom. i. p. 471;) and

that the Jews were the only dissenters whom Abul Waled, king of

Grenada, (A.D. 1313,) could either discountenance or tolerate,

(tom. ii. p. 288.)]



[Footnote 213: Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 288.  Leo

Africanus would have flattered his Roman masters, could he have

discovered any latent relics of the Christianity of Africa.]



     After the revolution of eleven centuries, the Jews and

Christians of the Turkish empire enjoy the liberty of conscience

which was granted by the Arabian caliphs.  During the first age

of the conquest, they suspected the loyalty of the Catholics,

whose name of Melchites betrayed their secret attachment to the

Greek emperor, while the Nestorians and Jacobites, his inveterate

enemies, approved themselves the sincere and voluntary friends of

the Mahometan government. ^214 Yet this partial jealousy was

healed by time and submission; the churches of Egypt were shared

with the Catholics; ^215 and all the Oriental sects were included

in the common benefits of toleration. The rank, the immunities,

the domestic jurisdiction of the patriarchs, the bishops, and the

clergy, were protected by the civil magistrate: the learning of

individuals recommended them to the employments of secretaries

and physicians: they were enriched by the lucrative collection of

the revenue; and their merit was sometimes raised to the command

of cities and provinces.  A caliph of the house of Abbas was

heard to declare that the Christians were most worthy of trust in

the administration of Persia.  "The Moslems," said he, "will

abuse their present fortune; the Magians regret their fallen

greatness; and the Jews are impatient for their approaching

deliverance." ^216 But the slaves of despotism are exposed to the

alternatives of favor and disgrace. The captive churches of the

East have been afflicted in every age by the avarice or bigotry

of their rulers; and the ordinary and legal restraints must be

offensive to the pride, or the zeal, of the Christians. ^217

About two hundred years after Mahomet, they were separated from

their fellow- subjects by a turban or girdle of a less honorable

color; instead of horses or mules. they were condemned to ride on

asses, in the attitude of women. Their public and private

building were measured by a diminutive standard; in the streets

or the baths it is their duty to give way or bow down before the

meanest of the people; and their testimony is rejected, if it may

tend to the prejudice of a true believer.  The pomp of

processions, the sound of bells or of psalmody, is interdicted in

their worship; a decent reverence for the national faith is

imposed on their sermons and conversations; and the sacrilegious

attempt to enter a mosch, or to seduce a Mussulman, will not be

suffered to escape with impunity.  In a time, however, of

tranquillity and justice, the Christians have never been

compelled to renounce the Gospel, or to embrace the Koran; but

the punishment of death is inflicted upon the apostates who have

professed and deserted the law of Mahomet.  The martyrs of

Cordova provoked the sentence of the cadhi, by the public

confession of their inconstancy, or their passionate invectives

against the person and religion of the prophet. ^218 

[Footnote 214: Absit (said the Catholic to the vizier of Bagdad)

ut pari loco habeas Nestorianos, quorum praeter Arabas nullus

alius rex est, et Graecos quorum reges amovendo Arabibus bello

non desistunt, &c.  See in the Collections of Assemannus

(Bibliot. Orient. tom. iv. p. 94 - 101) the state of the

Nestorians under the caliphs.  That of the Jacobites is more

concisely exposed in the Preliminary Dissertation of the second

volume of Assemannus.] 

[Footnote 215: Eutych. Annal. tom. ii. p. 384, 387, 388. 

Renaudot, Hist. Patriarch. Alex. p. 205, 206, 257, 332.  A taint

of the Monothelite heresy might render the first of these Greek

patriarchs less loyal to the emperors and less obnoxious to the

Arabs.]



[Footnote 216: Motadhed, who reigned from A.D. 892 to 902.  The

Magians still held their name and rank among the religions of the

empire, (Assemanni, Bibliot. Orient. tom. iv. p. 97.)]



[Footnote 217: Reland explains the general restraints of the

Mahometan policy and jurisprudence, (Dissertat. tom. iii. p. 16 -

20.) The oppressive edicts of the caliph Motawakkel, (A.D. 847 -

861,) which are still in force, are noticed by Eutychius, (Annal.

tom. ii. p. 448,) and D'Herbelot, (Bibliot. Orient. p. 640.) A

persecution of the caliph Omar II. is related, and most probably

magnified, by the Greek Theophanes (Chron p. 334.)]



[Footnote 218: The martyrs of Cordova (A.D. 850, &c.) are

commemorated and justified by St. Eulogius, who at length fell a

victim himself.  A synod, convened by the caliph, ambiguously

censured their rashness.  The moderate Fleury cannot reconcile

their conduct with the discipline of antiquity, toutefois

l'autorite de l'eglise, &c.  (Fleury, Hist. Eccles. tom. x. p.

415 - 522, particularly p. 451, 508, 509.) Their authentic acts

throw a strong, though transient, light on the Spanish church in

the ixth century.] 

     At the end of the first century of the Hegira, the caliphs

were the most potent and absolute monarchs of the globe.  Their

prerogative was not circumscribed, either in right or in fact, by

the power of the nobles, the freedom of the commons, the

privileges of the church, the votes of a senate, or the memory of

a free constitution.  The authority of the companions of Mahomet

expired with their lives; and the chiefs or emirs of the Arabian

tribes left behind, in the desert, the spirit of equality and

independence. The regal and sacerdotal characters were united in

the successors of Mahomet; and if the Koran was the rule of their

actions, they were the supreme judges and interpreters of that

divine book.  They reigned by the right of conquest over the

nations of the East, to whom the name of liberty was unknown, and

who were accustomed to applaud in their tyrants the acts of

violence and severity that were exercised at their own expense.

Under the last of the Ommiades, the Arabian empire extended two

hundred days' journey from east to west, from the confines of

Tartary and India to the shores of the Atlantic Ocean.  And if we

retrench the sleeve of the robe, as it is styled by their

writers, the long and narrow province of Africa, the solid and

compact dominion from Fargana to Aden, from Tarsus to Surat, will

spread on every side to the measure of four or five months of the

march of a caravan. ^219 We should vainly seek the indissoluble

union and easy obedience that pervaded the government of Augustus

and the Antonines; but the progress of the Mahometan religion

diffused over this ample space a general resemblance of manners

and opinions.  The language and laws of the Koran were studied

with equal devotion at Samarcand and Seville: the Moor and the

Indian embraced as countrymen and brothers in the pilgrimage of

Mecca; and the Arabian language was adopted as the popular idiom

in all the provinces to the westward of the Tigris. ^220



[Footnote 219: See the article Eslamiah, (as we say Christendom,)

in the Bibliotheque Orientale, (p. 325.) This chart of the

Mahometan world is suited by the author, Ebn Alwardi, to the year

of the Hegira 385 (A.D. 995.) Since that time, the losses in

Spain have been overbalanced by the conquests in India, Tartary,

and the European Turkey.]



[Footnote 220: The Arabic of the Koran is taught as a dead

language in the college of Mecca.  By the Danish traveller, this

ancient idiom is compared to the Latin; the vulgar tongue of

Hejaz and Yemen to the Italian; and the Arabian dialects of

Syria, Egypt, Africa, &c., to the Provencal, Spanish, and

Portuguese, (Niebuhr, Description de l'Arabie, p. 74, &c.)] 

