


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill





Book 1, Chapter 9



Of Production on a Large, and Production on a Small Scale



    1. From the importance of combination of labour, it is an

obvious conclusion, that there are many cases in which production

is made much more effective by being conducted on a large scale.

Whenever it is essential to the greatest efficiency of labour

that many labourers should combine, even though only in the way

of Simple Co-operation, the scale of the enterprise must be such

as to bring many labourers together, and the capital must be

large enough to maintain them. Still more needful is this when

the nature of the employment allows, and the extent of the

possible market encourages, a considerable division of labour.

The larger the enterprise, the farther the division of labour may

be carried. This is one of the principal causes of large

manufactories. Even when no additional subdivision of the work

would follow an enlargement of the operations, there will be good

economy in enlarging them to the point at which every person to

whom it is convenient to assign a special occupation, will have

full employment in that occupation. This point is well

illustrated by Mr. Babbage.(1*)

    "If machines be kept working through the twenty-four hours,"

(which is evidently the only economical mode of employing them,)

"it is necessary that some person shall attend to admit the

workmen at the time they relieve each other; and whether the

porter or other person so employed admit one person or twenty,

his rest will be equally disturbed. It will also be necessary

occasionally to adjust or repair the machine; and this can be

done much better by a workman accustomed to machine-making, than

by the person who uses it. Now, since the good performance and

the duration of machines depend, to a very great extent, upon

correcting every shake or imperfection in their parts as soon as

they appear, the prompt attention of a workman resident on the

spot will considerably reduce the expenditure arising from the

wear and tear of the machinery. But in the case of a single

lace-frame, or a single loom, this would be too expensive a plan.

Here then arises another circumstance which tends to enlarge the

extent of a factory. It ought to consist of such a number of

machines as shall occupy the whole time of one workman in keeping

them in order: if extended beyond that number, the same principle

of economy would point out the necessity of doubling or tripling

the number of machines, in order to employ the whole time of two

or three skilful workmen.

    "When one portion of the workman's labour consists in the

exertion of mere physical force, as in weaving, and in many

similar arts, it will soon occur to the manufacturer, that if

that part were executed by a steam engine, the same man might, in

the case of weaving, attend to two or more looms at once: and,

since we already suppose that one or more operative engineers

have been employed, the number of looms may be so arranged that

their time shall be fully occupied in keeping the steam-engine

and the looms in order.

    "Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes

gradually so enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the

night amounts to a considerable sum : and as there are already

attached to the establishment persons who are up all night, and

can therefore constantly attend to it, and also engineers to make

and keep in repair any machinery, the addition of an apparatus

for making gas to light the factory leads to a new extension, at

the same time that it contributes, by diminishing the expense of

lighting, and the risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost

of manufacturing.

    "Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will have

been found necessary to establish an accountant's department,

with clerks to pay the workmen, and to see that they arrive at

their stated times; and this department must be in communication

with the agents who purchase the raw produce, and with those who

sell the manufactured article." It will cost these clerks and

accountants little more time and trouble to pay a large number of

workmen than a small number; to check the accounts of large

transactions, than of small. If the business doubled itself, it

would probably be necessary to increase, but certainly not to

double, the number either of accountants, or of buying and

selling agents. Every increase of business would enable the whole

to be caRed on with a proportionately smaller amount of labour.

    As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase

by any means proportionally to the quantity of business. Let us

take as an example, a set of operations which we are accustomed

to see carried on by one great establishment, that of the Post

Office. Suppose that the business, let us say only of the London

letter-post, instead of being centralized in a single concern,

were divided among five or six competing companies. Each of these

would be obliged to maintain almost as large an establishment as

is now sufficient for the whole. Since each must arrange for

receiving and delivering letters in all parts of the town, each

must send letter-carriers into every street, and almost every

alley, and this too as many times in the day as is now done by

the Post Office, if the service is to be as well performed. Each

must have an office for receiving letters in every neighbourhood,

with all subsidiary arrangements for collecting the letters from

the different offices and re-distributing them. To this must be

added the much greater number of superior officers who would be

required to check and control the subordinates, implying not only

a greater cost in salaries for such responsible officers, but the

necessity, perhaps, of being satisfied in many instances with an

inferior standard of qualification, and so failing in the object.

    Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on a

large scale preponderate in any particular case over the more

watchful attention, and greater regard to minor gains and losses,

usually found in small establishments, can be ascertained, in a

state of free competition, by an unfailing test. Wherever there

are large and small establishments in the same business, that one

of the two which in existing circumstances carries on the

production at greatest advantage will be able to undersell the

other. The power of permanently underselling can only, generally

speaking, be derived from increased effectiveness of labour; and

this, when obtained by a more extended division of employment, or

by a classification tending to a better economy of skill, always

implies a greater produce from the same labour, and not merely

the same produce from less labour: it increases not the surplus

only, but the gross produce of industry. If an increased quantity

of the particular article is not required, and part of the

labourers in consequence lose their employment, the capital which

maintained and employed them is also set at liberty; and the

general produce of the country is increased by some other

application of their labour.

    Another of the causes of large manufactories, however, is the

introduction of processes requiring expensive machinery.

Expensive machinery supposes a large capital; and is not resorted

to except with the intention of producing, and the hope of

selling, as much of the article as comes up to the full powers of

the machine. For both these reasons, wherever costly machinery is

used, the large system of production is inevitable. But the power

of underselling is not in this case so unerring a test as in the

former, of the beneficial effect on the total production of the

community. The power of underselling does not depend on the

absolute increase of produce, but on its bearing an increased

proportion to the expenses; which, as was shown in a former

chapter,(2*) it may do, consistently with even a diminution of

the gross annual produce. By the adoption of machinery, a

circulating capital, which was perpetually consumed and

reproduced, has been converted into a fixed capital, requiring

only a small annual expense to keep it up: and a much smaller

produce will suffice for merely covering that expense, and

replacing the remaining circulating capital of the producer. The

machinery therefore might answer perfectly well to the

manufacturer, and enable him to undersell his competitors, though

the effect on the production of the country might be not an

increase but a diminution. It is true, the article will be sold

cheaper, and therefore, of that single article, there will

probably be not a smaller, but a greater quantity sold; since the

loss to the community collectively has fallen upon the

work-people, and they are not the principal customers, if

customers at all, of most branches of manufacture. But though

that particular branch of industry may extend itself, it will be

by replenishing its diminished circulating capital from that of

the community generally; and if the labourers employed in that

department escape loss of employment, it is because the loss will

spread itself over the labouring people at large. If any of them

are reduced to the condition of unproductive labourers, supported

by voluntary or legal charity, the gross produce of the country

is to that extent permanently diminished, until the ordinary

progress of accumulation makes it up; but if the condition of the

labouring classes enables them to bear a temporary reduction of

wages, and the superseded labourers become absorbed in other

employments, their labour is still productive, and the breach in

the gross produce of the COmmunity is repaired, though not the

detriment to the labourers. I have restated this exposition,

which has already been made in a former place, to impress more

strongly the truth, that a mode of production does not of

necessity increase the productive effect of the collective labour

of a community, because it enables a particular commodity to be

sold cheaper. The one consequence generally accompanies the

other, but not necessarily. I will not here repeat the reasons I

formerly gave, nor anticipate those which will be given more

fully hereafter, for deeming the exception to be rather a case

abstractedly possible, than one which is frequently realized in

fact.

    A considerable part of the saving of labour effected by

substituting the large system of production for the small, is the

saving in the labour of the capitalists themselves. If a hundred

producers with small capitals carry on separately the same

business, the superintendence of each concern will probably

require the whole attention of the person conducting it,

sufficiently at least to hinder his time or thoughts from being

disposable for anything else: while a single manufacturer

possessing a capital equal to the sum of theirs, with ten or a

dozen clerks, could conduct the whole of their amount of

business, and have leisure too for other occupations. The small

capitalist, it is true, generally combines with the business of

direction some portion of the details, which the other leaves to

his subordinates: the small farmer follows his own plough, the

small tradesman serves in his own shop, the small weaver plies

his own loom. But in this very union of functions there is, in a

great proportion of cases, a want of economy. The principal in

the concern is either wasting, in the routine of a business,

qualities suitable for the direction of it, or he is only fit for

the former, and then the latter will be ill done. I must observe,

however, that I do not attach, to this saving of labour, the

importance often ascribed to it. There is undoubtedly much more

labour expended in the superintendence of many small capitals

than in that of one large capital. For this labour however the

small producers have generally a full compensation, in the

feeling of being their own masters, and not servants of an

employer. It may be said, that if they value this independence

they will submit to pay a price for it, and to sell at the

reduced rates occasioned by the competition of the great dealer

or manufacturer. But they cannot always do this and continue to

gain a living. They thus gradually disappear from society. After

having consumed their little capital in prolonging the

unsuccessful struggle, they either sink into the condition of

hired labourers, or become dependent on others for support.



    2. Production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the

practice of forming a large capital by the combination of many

small contributions; or, in other words, by the formation of

joint stock companies. The advantages of the joint stock

principle are numerous and important.

    In the first place, many undertakings require an amount of

capital beyond the means of the richest individual or private

partnership. No individual could have made a railway from London

to Liverpool; it is doubtful if any individual could even work

the traffic on it, now when it is made. The government indeed

could have done both; and in countries where the practice of

co-operation is only in the earlier stages of its growth, the

government can alone be looked to for any of the works for which

a great combination of means is requisite; because it can obtain

those means by compulsory taxation, and is already accustomed to

the conduct of large operations. For reasons, however, which are

tolerably well known, and of which we shall treat fully

hereafter, government agency for the conduct of industrial

operations is generally one of the least eligible of resources,

when any other is available.

    Next, there are undertakings which individuals are not

absolutely incapable of performing, but which they cannot perform

on the scale and with the continuity which are ever more and more

required by the exigencies of a society in an advancing state.

Individuals are quite capable of despatching ships from England

to any or every part of the world, to carry passengers and

letters; the thing was done before joint stock companies for the

purposed were heard of. But when, from the increase of population

and transactions, as well as of means of payment, the public will

no longer content themselves with occasional opportunities, but

require the certainty that packets shall start regularly, for

some places once or even twice a day, for others once a week, for

others that a steam ship of great size and expensive construction

shall depart on fixed days twice in each month, it is evident

that to afford an assurance of keeping up with punctuality such a

circle of costly operations, requires a much larger capital and a

much larger staff of qualified subordinates than can be commanded

by an individual capitalist. There are other cases, again, in

which though the business might be perfectly well transacted with

small or moderate capitals, the guarantee of a great subscribed

stock is necessary or desirable as a security to the public for

the fulfilment of pecuniary engagements. This is especially the

case when the nature of the business requires that numbers of

persons should be willing to trust the concern with their money:

as in the business of banking, and that of insurance: to both of

which the joint stock principle is eminently adapted. It is an

instance of the folly and jobbery of the rulers of mankind, that

until a late period the joint stock principle, as a general

resort, was in this country interdicted by law to these two modes

of business; to banking altogether, and to insurance in the

department of sea risks; in order to bestow a lucrative monopoly

on particular establishments which the government was pleased

exceptionally to license, namely the Bank of England, and two

insurance companies, the London and the Royal Exchange.

    Another advantage of joint stock or associated management, is

its incident of publicity. This is not an invariable, but it is a

natural consequence of the joint stock principle, and might be,

as in some important cases it already is, compulsory. In banking,

insurance, and other businesses which depend wholly on

confidence, publicity is a still more important element of

success than a large subscribed capital. A heavy loss occurring

in a private bank may be kept secret; even though it were of such

magnitude as to cause the ruin of the concern, the banker may

still carry it on for years, trying to retrieve its position,

only to fall in the end with a greater crash: but this cannot so

easily happen in the case of a joint stock company, whose

accounts are published periodically. The accounts, even if

cooked, still exercise some check; and the suspicions of

shareholders, breaking out at the general meetings, put the

public on their guard.

    These are some of the advantages of joint stock over

individual management. But if we look to the other side of the

question, we shall find that individual management has also very

great advantages over joint stock. The chief of these is the much

keener interest of the managers in the success of the

undertaking.

    The administration of a joint stock association is, in the

main, administration by hired servants. Even the committee, or

board of directors, who are supposed to superintend the

management, and who do really appoint and remove the managers,

have no pecuniary interest in the good working of the concern

beyond the shares they individually hold, which are always a very

small part of the capital of the association, and in general but

a small part of the fortunes of the directors themselves; and the

part they take in the management usually divides their time with

many other occupations, of as great or greater importance to

their own interest; the business being the principal concern of

no one except those who are hired to carry it on. But experience

shows, and proverbs, the expression of popular experience,

attest, how inferior is the quality of hired servants, compared

with the ministration of those personally interested in the work,

and how indispensable, when hired service must be employed, is

"the master's eye" to watch over it.

    The successful conduct of an industrial enterprise requires

two quite distinct qualifications: fidelity, and zeal. The

fidelity of the hired managers of a concern it is possible to

secure. When their work admits of being reduced to a definite set

of rules, the violation of these is a matter on which conscience

cannot easily blind itself, and on which responsibility may be

enforced by the loss of employment. But to carry on a great

business successfully, requires a hundred things which, as they

cannot be defined beforehand, it is impossible to convert into

distinct and positive obligations. First and principally, it

requires that the directing mind should be incessantly occupied

with the subject; should be continually laying schemes by which

greater profit may be obtained, or expense saved. This intensity

of interest in the subject it is seldom to be expected that any

one should feel, who is conducting a business as the hired

servant and for the profit of another. There are experiments in

human affairs which are conclusive on the point. Look at the

whole class of rulers, and ministers of state. The work they are

entrusted with, is among the most interesting and exciting of all

occupations; the personal share which they themselves reap of the

national benefits or misfortunes which befall the state under

their rule, is far from trifling, and the rewards and punishments

which they may expect from public estimation are of the plain and

palpable kind which are most keenly felt and most widely

appreciated. Yet how rare a thing is it to find a statesman in

whom mental indolence is not stronger than all these inducements.

How infinitesimal is the proportion who trouble themselves to

form, or even to attend to, plans of public improvement, unless

when it is made still more troublesome to them to remain

inactive; or who have any other real desire than that of rubbing

on, so as to escape general blame. On a smaller scale, all who

have ever employed hired labour have had ample experience of the

efforts made to give as little labour in exchange for the wages,

as is compatible with not being turned off. The universal neglect

by domestic servants of their employer's interests, wherever

these are not protected by some fixed rule, is matter of common

remark; unless where long continuance in the same service, and

reciprocal good offices, have produced either personal

attachment, or some feeling of a common interest.

    Another of the disadvantages of joint stock concerns, which

is in some degree common to all concerns on a large scale, is

disregard of small gains and small savings. In the management of

a great capital and great transactions, especially when the

managers have not much interest in it of their own, small sums

are apt to be counted for next to nothing; they never seem worth

the care and trouble which it costs to attend to them, and the

credit of liberality and openhandedness is cheaply bought by a

disregard of such trifling considerations. But small profits and

small expenses often repeated, amount to great gains and losses:

and of this a large capitalist is often a sufficiently good

calculator to be practically aware; and to arrange his business

on a system, which if enforced by a sufficiently vigilant

superintendence, precludes the possibility of the habitual waste,

otherwise incident to a great business. But the managers of a

joint stock concern seldom devote themselves sufficiently to the

work, to enforce unremittingly, even if introduced, through every

detail of the business, a really economical system.

    From considerations of this nature, Adam Smith was led to

enunciate as a principle, that joint stock companies could never

be expected to maintain themselves without an exclusive

privilege, except in branches of business which, like banking,

insurance, and some others, admit of being, in a considerable

degree, reduced to fixed rules. This, however, is one of those

over-statements of a true principle, often met with in Adam

Smith. In his days there were few instances of joint stock

companies which had been permanently successful without a

monopoly, except the class of cases which he referred to; but

since his time there have been many; and the regular increase

both of the spirit of combination and of the ability to combine,

will doubtless produce many more. Adam Smith fixed his

observation too exclusively on the superior energy and more

unremitting attention brought to a business in which the whole

stake and the whole gain belong to the persons conducting it; and

he overlooked various countervailing considerations which go a

great way towards neutralizing even that great point of

superiority.

    Of these one of the most important is that which relates to

the intellectual and active qualifications of the directing head.

The stimulus of individual interest is some security for

exertion, but exertion is of little avail if the intelligence

exerted is of an inferior order, which it must necessity be in

the majority of concerns carried on by the persons chiefly

interested in them. Where the concern is large, and can afford a

remuneration sufficient to attract a class of candidates superior

to the common average, it is possible to select for the general

management, and for all the skilled employments of a subordinate

kind, persons of a degree of acquirement and cultivated

intelligence which more than compensates for their inferior

interest in the result. Their greater perspicacity enables them,

with even a part of their minds, to see probabilities of

advantage which never occur to the ordinary run of men by the

continued exertion of the whole of theirs; and their superior

knowledge, and habitual rectitude of perception and of judgment,

guard them against blunders, the fear of which would prevent the

others from hoarding their interests in any attempt out of the

ordinary routine.

    It must be further remarked, that it is not a necessary

consequence of joint stock management, that the persons employed,

whether in superior or in subordinate offices, should be paid

wholly by fixed salaries. There are modes of connecting more or

less intimately the interest of the employees with the pecuniary

success of the concern. There is a long series of intermediate

positions, between working wholly on one's own account, and

working by the day, week, or year for an invariable payment. Even

in the case of ordinary unskilled labour, there is such a thing

as task-work, or working by the piece: and the superior

efficiency of this is so well known, that judicious employers

always resort to it when the work admits of being put out in

definite portions, without the necessity of too troublesome a

surveillance to guard against inferiority in the execution. In

the case of the managers of joint stock companies, and of the

superintending and controlling officers in many private

establishments, it is a common enough practice to connect their

pecuniary interest with the interest of their employers, by

giving them part of their remuneration in the form of a

percentage on the profits. The personal interest thus given to

hired servants is not comparable in intensity to that of the

owner of the capital; hut it is sufficient to be a very material

stimulus to zeal and carefulness, and, when added to the

advantage of superior intelligence, often raises the quality of

the service much above that which the generality of masters are

capable of rendering to themselves. The ulterior extensions of

which this principle of remuneration is susceptible, being of

great social as well as economical importance, will be more

particularly adverted to in a subsequent stage of the present

inquiry.

    As I have already remarked of large establishments generally,

when compared with small ones, whenever competition is free its

results will show whether individual or joint stock agency is

hest adapted to the particular case, since that which is most

efficient and most economical will always in the end succeed in

underselling the other.



    3. The possibility of substituting the large system of

production for the small, depends of course, in the first place,

on the extent of the market. The large system can only be

advantageous when a large amount of business is to be done: it

implies, therefore, either a populous and flourishing community,

or a great opening for exportation. Again, this as well as every

other change in the system of production is greatly favoured by a

progressive condition of capital. It is chiefly when the capital

of a country is receiving a great annual increase, that there is

a large amount of capital seeking for investment: and a new

enterprise is much sooner and more easily entered upon by new

capital, than by withdrawing capital from existing employments.

The change is also much facilitated by the existence of large

capitals in few hands. It is true that the same amount of capital

can be raised by bringing together many small sums. But this

(besides that it is not equally well suited to all branches of

industry) supposes a much greater degree of commercial confidence

and enterprise diffused through the community, and belongs

altogether to a more advanced stage of industrial progress.

    In the countries in which there are the largest markets, the

widest diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise, the

greatest annual increase of capital, and the greatest number of

large capitals owned by individuals, there is a tendency to

substitute more and more, in one branch of industry after

another, large establishments for small ones. In England, the

chief type of all these characteristics, there is a perpetual

growth not only of large manufacturing establishments, but also,

wherever a sufficient number of purchasers are assembled, of

shops and warehouses for conducting retail business on a large

scale. These are almost always able to undersell the smaller

tradesmen, partly, it is understood, by means of division of

labour, and the economy occasioned by limiting the employment of

skilled agency to cases where skill is required; and partly, no

doubt, by the saving of labour arising from the great scale of

the transactions; as it costs no more time, and not much more

exertion of mind, to make a large purchase, for example, than a

small one, and very much less than to make a number of small

ones.

    With a view merely to production, and to the greatest

efficiency of labour, this change is wholly beneficial. In some

cases it is attended with drawbacks, rather social than

economical, the nature of which has been already hinted at. But

whatever disadvantages may be supposed to attend on the change

from a small to a large system of production, they are not

applicable to the change from a large to a still larger. When, in

any employment, the régime of independent small producers has

either never been possible, or has been superseded, and the

system of many work-people under One management has become fully

established, from that time any further enlargement in the scale

of production is generally an unqualified benefit. It is obvious,

for example, how great an economy of labour would be obtained if

London were supplied by a single gas or water company instead of

the existing plurality. While there are even as many as two, this

implies double establishments of all sorts, when one only, with a

small increase, could probably perform the whole operation

equally well; double sets of machinery and works, when the whole

of the gas or water required could generally be produced by one

set only; even double sets of pipes, if the companies did not

prevent this needless expense by agreeing upon a division of the

territory. Were there only one establishment, it could make lower

charges, consistently with obtaining the rate of profit now

realized. But would. it do so? Even if it did not, the community

in the aggregate would still be a gainer. since the shareholders

are a part of the community, and they would obtain higher profits

while the consumers paid only the same. It is, however, an error

to suppose that the prices are ever permanently kept down by the

competition of these companies. Where competitors are so few,

they always end by agreeing not to compete. They may run a race

of cheapness to ruin a new candidate, but as soon as he has

established his footing they come to terms with him. When,

therefore, a business of real public importance can only be

carried on advantageously upon so large a scale as to render the

liberty of competition almost illusory, it is an unthrifty

dispensation of the public resources that several costly sets of

arrangements should be kept up for the purpose of rendering to

the community this one service. It is much better to treat it at

once as a public function; and if it be not such as the

government itself could beneficially undertake, it should be made

over entire to the company or association which will perform it

on the best terms for the public. In the case of railways, for

example, no one can desire to see the enormous waste of capital

and land (not to speak of increased nuisance) involved in the

construction of a second railway to connect the same places

already united by an existing one; while the two would not do the

work better than it could be done by one, and after a short time

would probably be amalgamated. Only one such line ought to be

permitted, but the control over that line never ought to be

parted with by the State, unless on a temporary concession, as in

France; and the vested right which Parliament has allowed to be

acquired by the existing companies, like all other proprietary

rights which are opposed to public utility, is morally valid only

as a claim to compensation.



    4. The question between the large and the small systems of

production as applied to agriculture -- between large and small

farming, the grande and the petite culture -- stands, in many

respects, on different grounds from the general question between

great and small industrial establishments. In its social aspect,

and as an element in the Distribution of Wealth, this question

will occupy us hereafter: but even as a question of production,

the superiority of the large system in agriculture is by no means

so clearly established as in manufactures.

    I have already remarked, that the operations of agriculture

are little susceptible of benefit from the division of labour.

There is but little separation of employments even on the largest

farm. The same persons may not in general attend to the live

stock, to the marketing, and to the cultivation of the soil; but

much beyond that primary and simple classification the

subdivision is not carried. The combination of labour of which

agriculture is susceptible, is chiefly that which Mr. Wakefield

terms Simple Co-operation; several persons helping one another in

the same work, at the same time and place. But I confess it seems

to me that this able writer attributes more importance to that

kind of co-operation, in reference to agriculture properly so

called, than it deserves. None of the common farming operations

require much of it. There is no particular advantage in setting a

great number of people to work together in ploughing or digging

or sowing the same field, or even in mowing or reaping it unless

time presses. A single family can generally supply all the

combination of labour necessary for these purposes. And in the

works in which an union of many efforts is really needed, there

is seldom found any impracticability in obtaining it where farms

are small.

    The waste of productive power by subdivision of the land

often amounts to a great evil, but this applies chiefly to a

subdivision so minute, that the cultivators have not enough land

to occupy their time. Up to that point the same principles which

recommend large manufactories are applicable to agriculture. For

the greatest productive efficiency, it is generally desirable

(though even this proposition must be received with

qualifications) that no family who have any land, should have

less than they could cultivate, or than will fully employ their

cattle and tools. These, however, are not the dimensions of large

farms, but of what are reckoned in England very small ones. The

large farmer has some advantage in the article of buildings. It

does not cost so much to house a great number of cattle in one

building, as to lodge them equally well in several buildings.

There is also some advantage in implements. A small farmer is not

so likely to possess expensive instruments. But the principal

agricultural implements, even when of the best construction, are

not expensive. It may not answer to a small farmer to own a

threshing machine, for the small quantity of corn he has to

thresh; but there is no reason why such a machine should not in

every neighbourhood be owned in common, or provided by some

person to whom the others pay a consideration for its use;

especially as, when worked by steam, they are so constructed as

to be moveable.(3*) The large farmer can make some saving in cost

of carriage. There is nearly as much trouble in carrying a small

portion of produce to market, as a much greater produce; in

bringing home a small, as a much larger quantity of manures, and

articles of daily consumption. There is also the greater

cheapness of buying things in large quantities. These various

advantages must count for something, but it does not seem that

they ought to count for very much. In England, for some

generations, there has been little experience of small farms; but

in Ireland the experience has been ample, not merely under the

worst but under the best management; and the highest Irish

authorities may be cited in opposition to the opinion which on

this subject commonly prevails in England. Mr. Blacker, for

example, one of the most experienced agriculturists and

successful improvers in the North of Ireland, whose experience

was chiefly in the best cultivated, which are also the most

minutely divided parts of the country, was of opinion, that

tenants holding farms not exceeding from five to eight or ten

acres, could live comfortably and pay as high a rent as any large

farmer whatever. "I am firmly persuaded," (he says,(4*) "that the

small farmer who holds his own plough and digs his own ground, if

he follows a proper rotation of crops, and feeds his cattle in

the house, can undersell the large farmer, or in other words can

pay a rent which the other cannot afford; and in this I am

confirmed by the opinion of many practical men who have well

considered the subject... The English farmer of 700 to 800 acres

is a kind of man approaching to what is known by the name of a

gentleman farmer. He must have his horse to ride, and his gig,

and perhaps an overseer to attend to his labourers; he certainly

cannot superintend himself the labour going on in a farm of 800

acres." After a few other remarks, he adds, "Besides all these

drawbacks, which the small farmer knows little about, there is

the great expense of carting out the manure from the homestead to

such a great distance, and again carting home the crop. A single

horse will consume the produce of more land than would feed a

small farmer and his wife and two children. And what is more than

all, the large farmer says to his labourers, go to your work; but

when the small farmer has occasion to hire them, he says, come;

the intelligent reader will, I dare say, understand the

difference."

    One of the objections most urged against small farms is, that

they do not and cannot maintain, proportionally to their extent,

so great a number of cattle as large farms, and that this

occasions such a deficiency of manure, that a soil much

subdivided must always be impoverished. It will be found,

however, that subdivision only produces this effect when it

throws the land into the hands of cultivators so poor as not to

possess the amount of live stock suitable to the size of their

farms. A small farm and a badly stocked farm are not synonymous.

To make the comparison fairly, we must suppose the same amount of

capital which is possessed by the large farmers to be

disseminated among the small ones. When this condition, or even

any approach to it, exists, and when stall feeding is practised

(and stall feeding now begins to be considered good economy even

on large farms), experience, far from bearing out the assertion

that small farming is unfavourable to the multiplication of

cattle, conclusively establishes the very reverse. The abundance

of cattle, and copious use of manure, on the small farms of

Flanders, are the most striking features in that Flemish

agriculture which is the admiration of all competent judges,

whether in England or on the Continent.(5*)

    The disadvantage, when disadvantage there is, of small or

rather of peasant farming, as compared with capitalist farming,

must chiefly consist in inferiority of skill and knowledge; but

it is not true, as a general fact, that such inferiority exists.

Countries of small farms and peasant farming, Flanders and Italy,

had a good agriculture many generations before England, and

theirs is still, as a whole, probably the best agriculture in the

world. The empirical skill, which is the effect of daily and

close observation, peasant farmers often possess in an eminent

degree. The traditional knowledge, for example, of the culture of

the vine, possessed by the peasantry of the countries where the

best wines are produced, is extraordinary. There is no doubt an

absence of science, or at least of theory; and to some extent a

deficiency of the spirit of improvement, so far as relates to the

introduction of new processes. There is also a want of means to

make experiments, which can seldom be made with advantage except

by rich proprietors or capitalists. As for those systematic

improvements which operate on a large tract of country at once

(such as great works of draining or irrigation) or which for any

other reasons do really require large numbers of workmen

combining their labour, these are not in general to be expected

from small farmers, or even small proprietors, though combination

among them for such purposes is by no means unexampled, and will

become more common as their intelligence is more developed.

    Against these disadvantages is to be placed, where the tenure

of land is of the requisite kind, an ardour of industry

absolutely unexampled in any other condition of agriculture. This

is a subject on which the testimony of competent witnesses is

unanimous. The working of the petite culture cannot be fairly

judged where the small cultivator is merely a tenant, and not

even a tenant on fixed conditions, but (as until lately in

Ireland) at a nominal rent greater than can be paid, and

therefore practically at a varying rent always amounting to the

utmost that can be paid. To understand the subject, it must be

studied where the cultivator is the proprietor, or at least a

métayer with a permanent tenure; where the labour he exerts to

increase the produce and value of the land avails wholly, or at

least partly, to his own benefit and that of his descendants. In

another division of our subject, we shall discuss at some length

the important subject of tenures of land, and I defer till then

any citation of evidence on the marvellous industry of peasant

proprietors. It may suffice here to appeal to the immense amount

of gross produce which, even without a permanent tenure, English

labourers generally obtain from their little allotments; a

produce beyond comparison greater than a large farmer extracts,

or would find it his interest to extract, from the same piece of

land.

    And this I take to be the true reason why large cultivation

is generally most advantageous as a mere investment for profit.

Land occupied by a large farmer is not, in one sense of the word,

farmed so highly. There is not nearly so much labour expended on

it. This is not on account of any economy arising from

combination of labour, but because, by employing less, a greater

return is obtained in proportion to the outlay. It does not

answer to any one to pay others for exerting all the labour which

the peasant, or even the allotment-holder, gladly undergoes when

the fruits are to be wholly reaped by himself. This labour,

however, is not unproductive : it all adds to the gross produce.

With anything like equality of skill and knowledge, the large

farmer does not obtain nearly so much from the soil as the small

proprietor, or the small farmer with adequate motives to

exertion: but though his returns are less, the labour is less in

a still greater degree, and as whatever labour he employs must be

paid for, it does not suit his purpose to employ more.

    But although the gross produce of the land is greatest,

caeteris paribus, under small cultivation, and although,

therefore, a country is able on that system to support a larger

aggregate population, it is generally assumed by English writers

that what is termed the net produce, that is, the surplus after

feeding the cultivators, must be smaller; that therefore, the

population disposable for all other purposes, for manufactures,

for commerce and navigation, for national defence, for the

promotion of knowledge, for the liberal professions, for the

various functions of government, for the arts and literature, all

of which are dependent on this surplus for their existence as

occupations, must be less numerous; and that the nation,

therefore (waving all question as to the condition of the actual

cultivators), must be inferior in the principal elements of

national power, and in many of those of general well-being. This,

however, has been taken for granted much too readily. Undoubtedly

the non-agricultural population will bear a less ratio to the

agricultural, under small than under large cultivation. But that

it will be less numerous absolutely, is by no means a

consequence. If the total population, agricultural and

non-agricultural, is greater, the nonagricultural portion may he

more numerous in itself, and may yet be a smaller proportion of

the whole. If the gross produce is larger, the net produce may

may be larger, and yet bear a smaller ratio to the gross produce.

Yet even Mr. Wakefield sometimes appears to confound these

distinct ideas. In France it is computed that two-thirds of the

whole population are agricultural. In England, at most,

one-third. Hence Mr. Wakefield infers, that "as in France only

three people are supported by the labour of two cultivators,

while in England the labour of two cultivators supports six

people, English agriculture is twice as productive as French

agriculture," owing to the superior efficiency of large farming

through combination of labour. But in the first place, the facts

themselves are overstated. The labour of two persons in England

does not quite support six people, for there is not a little food

imported from foreign countries, and from Ireland. In France,

too, the labour of two cultivators does much more than supply the

food of three persons. It provides the three persons, and

occasionally foreigners, with flax, hemp, and to a certain extent

with silk, oils, tobacco, and latterly sugar, which in England

are wholly obtained from abroad; nearly all the timber used in

France is of home growth, nearly all which is used in England is

imported; the principal fuel of France is procured and brought to

market by persons reckoned among agriculturists, in England by

persons not so reckoned. I do not take into calculation hides and

wool, these products being common to both countries, nor wine or

brandy produced for home consumption, since England has a

corresponding production of beer and spirits; but England has no

material export of either article, and a great importation of the

last, while France supplies wines and spirits to the whole world.

I say nothing of fruit, eggs, and such minor particles of

agricultural produce, in which the export trade of France is

enormous. But not to lay undue stress on these abatements, we

will take the statement as it stands. Suppose that two persons,

in England, do bon?fide produce the food of six, while in

France, for the same purpose, the labour of four is requisite.

Does it follow that England must have a larger surplus for the

support of a non-agricultural population? No; but merely that she

can devote two-thirds of her whole produce to the purpose,

instead of one-third. Suppose the produce to be twice as great,

and the one-third will amount to as much as the two-thirds. The

fact might be, that owing to the greater quantity of labour

employed on the French system, the same land would produce food

for twelve persons which on the English system would only produce

it for six: and if this were so, which would be quite consistent

with the conditions of the hypothesis, then although the food for

twelve was produced by the labour of eight, while the six were

fed by the labour of only two, there would be the same number of

hands disposable for other employment in the one country as in

the other. I am not contending that the fact is so. I know that

the gross produce per acre in France as a whole (though not in

its most improved districts) averages much less than in England,

and that, in proportion to the extent and fertility of the two

countries, England has, in the sense we are now speaking of, much

the largest disposable population. But the disproportion

certainly is not to be measured by Mr. Wakefield's simple

criterion. As well might it be said that agricultural labour in

the United States, where, by a late census, four families in

every five appeared to be engaged in agriculture, must be still

more inefficient than in France.

    The inferiority of French cultivation (which, taking the

count as a whole, must be allowed to be real, though much

exaggerated) is probably more owing to the lower general average

of industrial skill and energy in that country, than to any

special cause; and even if partly the effect of minute

subdivision, it does not prove that small faring is

disadvantageous, but only (what is undoubtedly the fact) that

farms in France are very frequently too small, and, what is

worse, broken up into an almost incredible number of patches or

parcelles, most inconveniently dispersed and parted from one

another.

    As a question, not of gross, but of net produce, the

comparative merits of the grande and the petite culture,

especially when the small farmer is also the proprietor, cannot

be looked upon as decided. It is a question on which good judges

at present differ. The current of English opinion is in favour of

large farms: on the Continent, the weight of authority seems to

be on the other side. Professor Rau, of Heidelberg, the author of

one of the most comprehensive and elaborate of extant treatises

on political economy, and who has that large acquaintance with

facts and authorities on his own subject, which generally

characterises his countrymen, lays it down as a settled truth,

that small or moderate-sized farms yield not only a larger gross

but a larger net produce: though, he adds, it is desirable there

should be some great proprietors, to lead the way in new

improvements.(6*) The most apparently impartial and

discriminating judgment that I have met with is that of M. Passy,

who (always speaking with reference to net produce) gives his

verdict in favour of large farms for grain and forage; but, for

the kinds of culture which require much labour and attention,

places the advantage wholly on the side of small cultivation;

including in this description, not only the vine and the olive,

where a considerable amount of care and labour must be bestowed

on each individual plant, but also roots, leguminous plants, and

those which furnish the materials of manufactures. The small

size, and consequent multiplication, of farms, according to all

authorities, are extremely favourable to the abundance of many

minor products of agriculture.(7*)

    It is evident that every labourer who extracts from the land

more than his own food, and that of any family he may have,

increases the means of supporting a non-agricultural population.

Even if his surplus is no more than enough to buy clothes, the

labourers who make the clothes are a non-agricultural population,

enabled to exist by food which he produces. Every agricultural

family, therefore, which produces its own necessaries, adds to

the net produce of agriculture; and so does every person born on

the land, who by employing himself on it, adds more to its gross

produce than the mere food which he eats. It is questionable

whether, even in the most subdivided districts of Europe which

are cultivated by the proprietors, the multiplication of hands on

the soil has approached, or tends to approach, within a great

distance of this limit. In France, though the subdivision is

confessedly too great, there is proof positive that it is far

from having reached the point at which it would begin to diminish

the power of supporting a non-agricultural population. This is

demonstrated by the great increase of the towns; which have of

late increased in a much greater ratio than the population

generally,(8*) showing (unless the condition of the town

labourers is becoming rapidly deteriorated, which there is no

reason to believe) that even by the unfair and inapplicable test

of proportions, the productiveness of agriculture must be on the

increase. This, too, concurrently with the amplest evidence that

in the more improved districts of France, and in some which,

until lately, were among the unimproved, there is a considerably

increased consumption of country produce by the country

population itself.

    Impressed with the conviction that, of all faults which can

be committed by a scientific writer on political and social

subjects, exaggeration, and assertion beyond the evidence, most

require to be guarded against, I limited myself in the early

editions of this work to the foregoing very moderate statements.

I little knew how much stronger my language might have been

without exceeding the truth, and how much the actual progress of

French agriculture surpassed anything which I had at that time

sufficient grounds to affirm. The investigations of that eminent

authority on agricultural statistics, M. Léonce de Lavergne,

undertaken by desire of the Academy of Moral and Political

Sciences of the Institute of France, have led to the conclusion

that since the Revolution of 1789, the total produce of French

agriculture has doubled; profits and wages having both increased

in about the same, and rent in a still greater ratio. M. de

Lavergne, whose impartiality is one of his greatest merits, is,

moreover, so far in this instance from the suspicion of having a

case to make out, that he is labouring to show, not how much

French agriculture has accomplished, but how much still remains

for it to do. "We have required" (he says) "no less than seventy

years to bring into cultivation two million hectares" (five

million English acres) "of waste land, to suppress half our

fallows, double our agricultural products, increase our

population by 30 per cent, our wages by 100 per cent, our rent by

150 per cent. At this rate we shall require three quarters of a

century more to arrive at the point which England has already

attained."(9*)

    After this evidence, we have surely now heard the last of the

incompatibility of small properties and small farms with

agricultural improvement. The only question which remains open is

one of degree; the comparative rapidity of agricultural

improvement under the two systems; and it is the general opinion

of those who are equally well acquainted with both, that

improvement is greatest under a due admixture between them.

    In the present chapter, I do not enter on the question

between great and small cultivation in any other respect than as

a question of production, and of the efficiency of labour. We

shall return to it hereafter as affecting the distribution of the

produce, and the physical and social well-being of the

cultivators themselves; in which aspects it deserves, and

requires, a still more particular examination.



NOTES:



1. Page 214 et seqq.



2. Supra, chap. vi. p. 94.



3. The observation in the text may hereafter may hereafter

require some degree of modification from inventions such as the

steam plough and the reaping machine. The effect, however, of

these improvements on the relative advantages of large and small

farms, will not depend on the efficiency of the instruments, but

on their costliness. I see no reason to expect that this will be

such as to make them inaccessible to small farmers, or

combinations of small farmers.



4. Prize Essay on the Management of Landed Property in Ireland,

by William Blacker, Esq. (1837).



5. "The number of beasts fed on a farm of which the whole is

arable land," (says the elaborate and intellegent treatise on

Flemish Husbandry, from personal observation and the best

sources, published in the Library of the Society for the

Diffusion of Useful Knowledge,) "is surprising to those who are

not acquainted with the mode in which the food is prepared for

the cattle. A beast for every three acres of land is a common

proportion, and in very small occupations where much spade

husbandry is used, the proportion is still greater. After

comparing the accounts given in a variety of places and

situations of the average quantity of milk which a cow gives when

fed in the stall,the result is, that it greatly exceeds that of

our best dairy farms, and the quantity of butter made from a

given quantity of milk is also greater. it appears astonishing

that the occupier of only ten or twelve acres of light arable

should be able to maintain four or five cows, but the fact is

notorious in the Waes country." (pp. 59, 60)

    This subject is treated very intelligently in the work of

Passy, "Des Systemes de Culture et de leur Influence sur

l'Economie Sociale", one of the most inpartial discussions, as

between the two systems, which has yet appeared in France.

    "Sans nul doute, c'est l'Angleterre qui, a superficie egale,

nourrit le plus d'animaux; la Hollande et quelques parties de la

Lombardie pourraient seules lui disputer cet avantage; mais

est-ce la un resultat des formes de l'exploitation, et des

circonstances de climat et de situation locale ne

concourent-elles pas a le produire? C'est, a notre avis, ce qui

ne saurait etre conteste. En effect, quoiqu'on en ait dit,

partout ou la grande et la petite culture se rencontrent sur les

memes points, c'est celle-ci qui, bien qu'elle ne puisse

entretenir autant de moutons, possede, tout compense, le plus

grand nobre d'animaux producteurs d'engrais. Voici, par example,

ce qui ressort des informations fournies par la Belgique.

    "Les deux provinces ou regne la plus petite culture sont

celles d'Anvers et de la Flandre oriente, et elles possedent en

moyenne, par 100 hectares de terres cultivees, 74 betes bovines

et 14 moutons. Les deux provinces ou se trouvent les grandes

fermes sont celles de Namur et du Hainaut, et elles n'ont en

moyenne, pour 100 hectares de terres cultivees, que 30 betes

bovines et 45 moutons. Or, en comptant, suivant l'usage, 10

moutons comme l'equivalent d'une tete de gros betail, nous

rencontrons d'un cote, 76 animaux servant a maintenir la

fecondite du sol; de l'autre, moins de 35, difference a coup sur

enorme. (D'apres les documents statistiques publies par le

Ministre de l'Interieur, 3me publication officielle.) Il est a

remarquer, au surplus, que le nombre des animaux n'est pas, dans

la partie de la Belgique dont le sol est devise en tres-petites

fermes, beaucoup moindre qu'en Angleterre. En l'evaluant dans

cette derniere contree a raison seulement du territoire en

culture, il y existe, par centaine d'hectares, 65 betes a corne

et pres de 260 moutons, c-a-d. l'equivalent de 91 des premiers,

ou seulement 15 de plus que dans l'autre. Et encore est-il juste

d'observer qu'en Belgique rien n'est perdu des engrais donnes par

des animaus nourris a peu pres toute l'annee a l'etable, tandis

qu'en Angleterre la pature en plein air affaiblit

considerablement les quantites qu'il devient possible de mettre

entierement a profit.

    "Dans le departement du Nord aussi, ce sont les

arrondissements dont les fermes ont la moindre contenance qui

entretiennent le plus d'animaux. Tandis que les arrondissements

de Lille et de Hazebrouck, outre un plus grand nombre de chevaux,

nourissent, l'un l'equivalent de 52 tetes de gros betail, l'autre

l'equivalent de 46; les arrondissement ou les exploitations sont

les plus grandes, ceux de Dunkerque et d'Avesnes, ne contiennent,

le premier, que l'equivalent de 44 betes bovines, l'autre que

celui de 40. (D'apres la Statisique de la France publiee par le

Ministre du Commerce: Agriculture, t. i.)

    "Pareilles recherces etendues sur d'autres points de la

France offriraient desresultats analogues. S'il est vrai que dans

la banlieue des villes, la petite culture s'abstienne de

garderdes animaux, au produit desquels elle supplee facilement

par des achats d'engrais, il ne se peut que le genre de travail

qui exige le plus de la terre ne soit pas celui qui en

entretienne le plus activement la fertilite. Assurement il n'est

pas donne aux petites fermes de posseder de nombroux troupeaux de

moutons, et c'est un inconvenient; mais, en revanche, elles

nourrissent plus de betes bovines que les grandes. C'est la une

necessite a laquelle elles ne sauraient se soustraire dans aucun

pays ou les besoins de la consommation le ont appelees a fleurir;

elles periraient si elles ne reussissaient pas a y satisfie.

    "Voici, au surplus, sur ce point des details dont

l'exactitude nos parait pleinement attestee par l'excellence du

travail ou nous les avons puises. Ces details, contenus dans la

statistique de la commune de Vensat (Puy de Dome), publiee

recement par M. le docteur Jusseraud, maire de la commune, sont

d'autant plus precieux, qu'ils mettent dans tout leur la nature

des changements que le developpement de la petite culture a, dans

le pays dont il s'agit, apportes au nombre et a l'espece des

animaux dont le produit en engrais soutient et acroit la

fertilite des terres. Dans la commune de Vensat, qui comprend

1612 hectares divises en 4600 parcelles appartenant a 591

proprietaires, le territoire exploite se compose de 1466

hectares. Or, en 1790, 17 fermes en occupaient les deux tiers et

20 autres tout le reste. Depuis lors, les cultures se sont

morcelees, et maintenant leur petitesse est extreme. Quelle a ete

l'influence du changement sur la quantite des animaux? Une

augmentation considerable. En 1790, la commune ne possedait

qu'environ 676 des premieres, et 533 seulement des secondes.

Ainsi pour remplacer 1300 moutons elle a acquis 376 boeufs et

vaches, et tout compense, la somme des engrais s'est accrue dans

la proportion de 490 a 729, ou de plus de 48 pour cent. Et encore

est-il a remarquer que, plus forts et mieux nourris a present,

les animaux contribuent bien davantage a entretenir la fertilite

des terres.

    "Voila ce que les faits nous apprennent sur ce point: il

n'est donc pas vrai que la petite culture ne nourrisse pas autant

d'animaux que les autres; loin de la, a condition locales

pareilles, c'est elle qui en possede le plus, et il ne devait pas

etre difficile de la presumer; car, du moment ou c'est elle qui

demande le plus aux terres, il faut bien qu'elle leur donne des

soins d'autant plus reparateurs qu'elle en exige davantage. Que

l'on prenne un a un les autres reproches; qu'on les examine a la

clarte de faits bien apprecies, on s'appercevra bientot qu'ils ne

sauraient etre mieux fondes, et qu'ils n'ont ete formules que

parce qu'on a compare l'etat des cultures dans des contrees ou

les causes de la prosperite agricole n'agissaient pas avec la

meme energie." (pp. 116-120)



6. See pp. 352 and 353 of a French translation published at

Brussels in 1839, by M. Fred de Kemmeter, of Ghent.



7. "Dans le department du Nord," says M. Passy, "une ferme de 20

hectares recueille en veaus, laitage, oeufs, et volailles,

parfois pour un millier de francs dans l'annee; et, les frais

defalques, c'est l'equivalent d'une addition au roduit net de 15

a 20 francs par hectare." Des Systemes de Culture, p. 114.



8. During the interval between the census of 1851 and that of

1856, the increase of the population of Paris alone, exceeded the

aggregate increase of all France; while nearly all the other

large towns likewise showed an increase.



9. Economie Rurale de la France depuis 1789. Par M. Leonce de

Lavergne. Membre de l'Institut et de la Societe Centrale

d'Agriculture de France. 2me ed. p. 59.


