


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 1, Chapter 5



Fundamental Propositions Respecting Capital



    1. If the preceding explanations have answered their purpose,

they have given not only a sufficiently complete possession of

the idea of Capital according to its definition, but a sufficient

familiarity with it in the concrete, and amidst the obscurity

with which the complication of individual circumstances surrounds

it, to have prepared even the unpractised reader for certain

elementary propositions or theorems respecting capital, the full

comprehension of which is already a considerable step out of

darkness into light.

    The first of these propositions is, That industry is limited

by capital. This is so obvious as to be taken for granted in many

common forms of speech; but to see a truth occasionally is one

thing, to recognise it habitually, and admit no propositions

inconsistent with it, is another. The axiom was until lately

almost universally disregarded by legislators and political

writers; and doctrines irreconcileable with it are still very

commonly professed and inculcated.

    The following are common expressions, implying its truth. The

act of directing industry to a particular employment is described

by the phrase "applying capital" to the employment. To employ

industry on the land is to apply capital to the land. To employ

labour in a manufacture is to invest capital in the manufacture.

This implies that industry cannot be employed to any greater

extent than there is capital to invest. The proposition, indeed,

must be assented to as soon as it is distinctly apprehended. The

expression "applying capital" is of course metaphorical: what is

really applied is labour; capital being an indispensable

condition. Again, we often speak of the "productive powers of

capital." This expression is not literally correct. The only

productive powers are those of labour and natural agents; or if

any portion of capital can by a stretch of language be said to

have a productive power of its own, it is only tools and

machinery, which, like wind or water, may be said to co-operate

with labour. The food of labourers and the materials of

production have no productive power; but labour cannot exert its

productive power unless provided with them. There can be no more

industry than is supplied with materials to work up and food to

eat. Self-evident as the thing is, it is often forgotten that the

people of a country are maintained and have their wants supplied,

not by the produce of present labour, but of past. They consume

what has been produced, not what is about to be produced. Now, of

what has been produced, a part only is allotted to the support of

productive labour; and there will not and cannot be more of that

labour than the portion so allotted (which is the capital of the

country) can feed, and provide with the materials and instruments

of production.

    Yet, in disregard of a fact so evident, it long continued to

be believed that laws and governments, without creating capital,

could create industry. Not by making the people more laborious,

or increasing the efficiency of their labour; these are objects

to which the government can, in some degree, indirectly

contribute. But without any increase in the skill or energy of

the labourers. and without causing any persons to labour who had

previously been maintained in idleness, it was still thought that

the government, without providing additional funds, could create

additional employment. A government would, by prohibitory laws,

put a stop to the importation of some commodity; and when by this

it had caused the commodity to be produced at home, it would

plume itself upon having enriched the country with a new branch

of industry, would parade in statistical tables the amount of

produce yielded and labour employed in the production, and take

credit for the whole of this as a gain to the country, obtained

through the prohibitory law. although this sort of political

arithmetic has fallen a little into discredit in England, it

still flourishes in the nations of Continental Europe. Had

legislators been aware that industry is limited by capital, they

would have seen that, the aggregate capital of the country not

having been increased, any portion of it which they by their laws

had caused to be embarked in the newly-acquired branch of

industry must have been withdrawn or withheld from some other; in

which it gave, or would have given, employment to probably about

the same quantity of labour which it employs in its new

occupation.(1)*



    2. Because industry is limited by capital, we are not however

to infer that it always reaches that limit. Capital may be

temporarily unemployed, as in the case of unsold goods, or funds

that have not yet found an investment: during this interval it

does not set in motion any industry. Or there may not be as many

labourers obtainable, as the capital would maintain and employ.

This has been known to occur in new colonies, where capital has

sometimes perished uselessly for want of labour: the Swan River

settlement (now called Western Australia), in the first years

after its foundation, was an instance. There are many persons

maintained from existing capital, who produce nothing, or who

might produce much more than they do. If the labourers were

reduced to lower wages, or induced to work more hours for the

same wages, or if their families, who are already maintained from

capital, were employed to a greater extent than they now are in

adding to the produce, a given capital would afford employment to

more industry. The unproductive consumption of productive

labourers, the whole of which is now supplied by capital, might

cease, or be postponed until the produce came in; and additional

productive labourers might be maintained with the amount. By such

means society might obtain from its existing resources a greater

quantity of produce: and to such means it has been driven, when

the sudden destruction of some large portion of its capital

rendered the employment of the reminder with the greatest

possible effect, a matter of paramount consideration for the

time.

    When industry has not come up to the limit imposed by

capital, governments may, in various ways, for example by

importing additional labourers, bring it nearer to that limit: as

by the importation of Coolies and free Negroes into the West

Indies. There is another way in which governments can create

additional industry. They can create capital. They may lay on

taxes, and employ the amount productively. They may do what is

nearly equivalent; they may lay taxes on income or expenditure,

and apply the proceeds towards paying off the public debts. The

fundholder, when paid off, would still desire to draw an income

from his property, most of which therefore would find its way

into productive employment, while a great part of it would have

been drawn from the fund for unproductive expenditure, since

people do not wholly pay their taxes from what they would have

saved, but partly, if not chiefly, from what they would have

spent. It may be added, that any increase in the productive power

of capital (or, more properly speaking, of labour) by improvement

in the arts of life, or otherwise, tends to increase the

employment for labour. since, when there is a greater produce

altogether, it is always probable that some portion of the

increase will be saved and converted into capital; especially

when the increased returns to productive industry hold out an

additional temptation to the conversion of funds from an

unproductive destination to a productive.



    3. While, on the one hand, industry is limited by capital, so

on the other, every increase of capital gives, or is capable of

giving, additional employment to industry., and this without

assignable limit. I do not mean to deny that the capital, or part

of it, may be so employed as not to support labourers, being

fixed in machinery, buildings, improvement of land, and the like.

In any large increase of capital a considerable portion will

generally be thus employed, and will only co-operate with

labourers, not maintain them. What I do intend to assert is, that

the portion which is destined to their maintenance, may

(supposing no alteration in anything else) be indefinitely

increased, without creating an impossibility of finding them

employment: in other words, that if there are human beings

capable of work, and food to feed them, they may always be

employed in producing something. This proposition requires to be

somewhat dwelt upon, being one of those which it is exceedingly

easy to assent to when presented in general terms, but somewhat

difficult to keep fast hold of, in the crowd and confusion of the

actual facts of society. It is also very much opposed to common

doctrines. There is not an opinion more general among mankind

than this, that the unproductive expenditure of the rich is

necessary to the employment of the poor. Before Adam Smith, the

doctrine had hardly been questioned; and even since his time,

authors of the highest name and of great merit* have contended,

that if consumers were to save and convert into capital more than

a limited portion of their income, and were not to devote to

unproductive consumption an amount of means bearing a certain

ratio to the capital of the country, the extra accumulation would

be merely so much waste, since there would be no market for the

commodities which the capital so created would produce. I

conceive this to be one of the many errors arising in political

economy, from the practice of not beginning with the examination

of simple cases, but rushing at once into the complexity of

concrete phenomena.

    Every one can see that if a benevolent government possessed

all the food, and all the implements and materials, of the

community, it could exact productive labour from all capable of

it, to whom it allowed a share in the food, and could be in no

danger of wanting a field for the employment of this productive

labour, since as long as there was a single want unsaturated

(which material objects could supply), of any one individual, the

labour of the community could be turned to the production of

something capable of satisfying that want. Now, the individual

possessors of capital, when they add to it by fresh

accumulations, are doing precisely the same thing which we

suppose to be done by a benevolent government. As it is allowable

to put any case by way of hypothesis, let us imagine the most

extreme case conceivable. Suppose that every capitalist came to

be of opinion that not being more meritorious than a

well-conducted labourer, he ought not to fare better; and

accordingly laid by, from conscientious motives, the surplus of

his profits; or suppose this abstinence not spontaneous, but

imposed by law or opinion upon all capitalists, and upon

landowners likewise. Unproductive expenditure is now reduced to

its lowest limit: and it is asked, how is the increased capital

to find employment? Who is to buy the goods which it will

produce? There are no longer customers even for those which were

produced before. The goods, therefore, (it is said) will remain

unsold; they will perish in the warehouses; until capital is

brought down to what it was originally, or rather to as much

less, as the demand of the consumers has lessened. But this is

seeing only one-half of the matter. In the case supposed, there

would no longer be any demand for luxuries, on the part of

capitalists and landowners. But when these classes turn their

income into capital, they do not thereby annihilate their power

of consumption; they do but transfer it from themselves to the

labourers to whom they give employment. Now, there are two

possible suppositions in regard to the labourers; either there

is, or there is not, an increase of their numbers, proportional

to the increase of capital. If there is, the case offers no

difficulty. The production of necessaries for the new population,

takes the place of the production of luxuries for a portion of

the old, and supplies exactly the amount of employment which has

been lost. But suppose that there is no increase of population.

The whole of what was previously expended in luxuries, by

capitalists and landlords, is distributed among the existing

labourers, in the form of additional wages. We will assume them

to be already sufficiently supplied with necessaries. What

follows? That the labourers become consumers of luxuries; and the

capital previously employed in the production of luxuries, is

still able to employ itself in the same manner: the difference

being, that the luxuries are shared among the community

generally, instead of being confined to a few. The increased

accumulation and increased production, might, rigorously

speaking, continue, until every labourer had every indulgence of

wealth, consistent with continuing to work; supposing that the

power of their labour were physically sufficient to produce all

this amount of indulgences for their whole number. Thus the limit

of wealth is never deficiency of consumers, but of producers and

productive power. Every addition to capital gives to labour

either additional employment, or additional remuneration;

enriches either the country, or the labouring class. If it finds

additional hands to set to work, it increases the aggregate

produce: if only the same hands, it gives them a larger share of

it; and perhaps even in this case, by stimulating them to greater

exertion, augments the produce itself.



    4. A second fundamental theorem respecting Capital, relates

to the source from which it is derived. It is the result of

saving. The evidence of this lies abundantly in what has been

already said on the subject. But the proposition needs some

further illustration.

    If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all

that they produce, and all the income they receive from what is

produced by others, capital could not increase. All capital, with

a trifling exception, was originally the result of saving. I say,

with a trifling exception; because a person who labours on his

own account, may spend on his own account all he produces,

without becoming destitute; and the provision of necessaries on

which he subsists until he has reaped his harvest, or sold his

commodity, though a real capital, cannot be said to have been

saved, since it is all used for the supply of his own wants, and

perhaps as speedily as if it had been consumed in idleness. We

may imagine a number of individuals or families settled on as

many separate pieces of land, each living on what their own

labour produces, and consuming the whole produce. But even these

must save (that is, spare from their personal consumption) as

much as is necessary for seed. Some saving, therefore, there must

have been, even in this simplest of all states of economical

relations; people must have produced more than they used, or used

less than they produced. Still more must they do so before they

can employ other labourers, or increase their production beyond

what can be accomplished by the work of their own hands. All that

any one employs in supporting and carrying on any other labour

than his own, must have been originally brought together by

saving; somebody must have produced it and forborne to consume

it. We may say, therefore, without material inaccuracy, that all

capital, and especially all addition to capital, are the result

of saving.

    In a rude and violent state of society, it continually

happens that the person who has capital is not the very person

who has saved it, but some one who, being stronger, or belonging

to a more powerful community, has possessed himself of it by

plunder. And even in a state of things in which property was

protected, the increase of capital has usually been, for a long

time, mainly derived from privations which, though essentially

the same with saving, are not generally called by that name,

because not voluntary. The actual producers have been slaves,

compelled to produce as much as force could extort from them, and

to consume as little as the self-interest or the usually very

slender humanity of their taskmasters would permit. This kind of

compulsory saving, however, would not have caused any increase of

capital, unless a part of the amount had been saved over again,

voluntarily, by the master. If all that he made his slaves

produce and forbear to consume, had been consumed by him on

personal indulgences, he would not have increased his capital,

nor been enabled to maintain an increasing number of slaves. To

maintain any slaves at all, implied a previous saving; a stock,

at least of food, provided in advance. This saving may not,

however, have been made by any self-imposed privation of the

master; but more probably by that of the slaves themselves while

free; the rapine or war, which deprived them of their personal

liberty, having transferred also their accumulations to the

conqueror.

    There are other cases in which the term saving, with the

associations usually belonging to it, does not exactly fit the

operation by which capital is increased. If it were said, for

instance, that the only way to accelerate the increase of capital

is by increase of saving, the idea would probably be suggested of

greater abstinence, and increased privation. But it is obvious

that whatever increases the productive power of labour, creates

an additional fund to make savings from, and enables capital to

be enlarged not only without additional privation, but

concurrently with an increase of personal consumption.

Nevertheless, there is here an increase of saving, in the

scientific sense. Though there is more consumed, there is also

more spared. There is a greater excess of production over

consumption. It is consistent with correctness to call this a

greater saving. Though the term is not unobjectionable, there is

no other which is not liable to as great objections. To consume

less than is produced, is saving; and that is the process by

which capital is increased; not necessarily by consuming less,

absolutely. We must not allow ourselves to be so much the slaves

of words, as to be unable to use the word saving in this sense,

without being in danger of forgetting that to increase capital

there is another way besides consuming less, namely, to produce

more.



    5. A third fundamental theorem respecting Capital, closely

connected with the one last discussed, is, that although saved,

and the result of saving, it is nevertheless consumed. The word

saving does not imply that what is saved is not consumed, nor

even necessarily that its consumption is deferred; but only that,

if consumed immediately, it is not consumed by the person who

saves it. If merely laid by for future use, it is said to be

hoarded; and while hoarded, is not consumed at all. But if

employed as capital, it is all consumed; though not by the

capitalist. Part is exchanged for tools or machinery, which are

worn out by use; part for seed or materials, which are destroyed

as such by being sown or wrought up, and destroyed altogether by

the consumption of the ultimate product. The remainder is paid in

wages to productive labourers, who consume it for their daily

wants; or if they in their turn save any part, this also is not,

generally speaking, hoarded, but (through savings banks, benefit

clubs, or some other channel) re-employed as capital, and

consumed.

    The principle now stated is a strong example of the necessity

of attention to the most elementary truths of our subject: for it

is one of the most elementary of them all, and yet no one who has

not bestowed some thought on the matter is habitually aware of

it, and most are not even willing to admit it when first stated.

To the vulgar, it is not at all apparent that what is saved is

consumed. To them, every one who saves, appears in the light of a

person who hoards : they may think such conduct permissible, or

even laudable, when it is to provide for a family, and the like ;

but they have no conception of it as doing good to other people:

saving is to them another word for keeping a thing to oneself;

while spending appears to them to be distributing it among

others. The person who expends his fortune in unproductive

consumption, is looked upon as diffusing benefits all around; and

is an object of so much favour, that some portion of the same

popularity attaches even to him who spends what does not belong

to him; who not only destroys his own capital, if he ever had

any, but under pretence of borrowing, and on promise of

repayment, possesses himself of capital belonging to others, and

destroys that likewise.

    This popular error comes from attending to a small portion

only of the consequences that flow from the saving or the

spending; all the effects of either which are out of sight, being

out of mind. The eye follows what is saved, into an imaginary

strong-box, and there loses sight of it; what is spent, it

follows into the hands of tradespeople and dependents; but

without reaching the ultimate destination in either case. Saving

(for productive investment), and spending, coincide very closely

in the first stage of their operations. The effects of both begin

with consumption; with the destruction of a certain portion of

wealth; only the things consumed, and the persons consuming, are

different. There is, in the one case, a wearing out of tools, a

destruction of material, and a quantity of food and clothing

supplied to labourers, which they destroy by use: in the other

case, there is a consumption, that is to say, a destruction, of

wines, equipages, and furniture. Thus far, the consequence to the

national wealth has been much the same; an equivalent quantity of

it has been destroyed in both cases. But in the spending, this

first stage is also the final stage; that particular amount of

the produce of labour has disappeared, and there is nothing left;

while, on the contrary, the saving person, during the whole time

that the destruction was going on, has had labourers at work

repairing it; who are ultimately found to have replaced, with an

increase, the equivalent of what has been consumed. And as this

operation admits of being repeated indefinitely without any fresh

act of saving, a saving once made becomes a fund to maintain a

corresponding number of labourers in perpetuity, reproducing

annually their own maintenance with a profit.

    It is the intervention of money which obscures, to an

unpractised apprehension, the true character of these phenomena.

Almost all expenditure being caRed on by means of money, the

money comes to be looked upon as the main feature in the

transaction; and since that does not perish, but only changes

hands, people overlook the destruction which takes place in the

case of unproductive expenditure. The money being merely

transferred, they think the wealth also has only been handed over

from the spendthrift to other people. But this is simply

confounding money with wealth. The wealth which has been

destroyed was not the money, but the wines, equipages, and

furniture which the money purchased; and these having been

destroyed without return, society collectively is poorer by the

amount. It may be said, perhaps, that wines, equipages, and

furniture, are not subsistence, tools, and materials, and could

not in any case have been applied to the support of labour; that

they are adapted for no other than unproductive consumption, and

that the detriment to the wealth of the community was when they

were produced, not when they were consumed. I am willing to allow

this, as far as is necessary for the argument, and the remark

would be very pertinent if these expensive luxuries were drawn

from an existing stock, never to be replenished. But since, on

the contrary, they continue to be produced as long as there are

consumers for them, and are produced in increased quantity to

meet an increased demand; the choice made by a consumer to expend

five thousand a year in luxuries, keeps a corresponding number of

labourers employed from year to year in producing things which

can be of no use to production; their services being lost so far

as regards the increase of the national wealth, and the tools,

materials, and food which they annually consume being so much

subtracted from the general stock of the community applicable to

productive purposes. In proportion as any class is improvident or

luxurious, the industry of the country takes the direction of

producing luxuries for their use; while not only the employment

for productive labourers is diminished, but the subsistence and

instruments which are the means of such employment do actually

exist in smaller quantity.

    Saving, in short, enriches, and spending impoverishes, the

community along with the individual; which is but saying in other

words, that society at large is richer by what it expends in

maintaining and aiding productive labour, but poorer by what it

consumes in its enjoyments.(2*)



    6. To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything which is

produced is consumed both what is saved and what is said to be

spent; and the former quite as rapidly as the latter. All the

ordinary forms of language tend to disguise this. When people

talk of the ancient wealth of a count, of riches inherited from

ancestors, and similar expressions, the idea suggested is, that

the riches so transmitted were produced long ago, at the time

when they are said to have been first acquired, and that no

portion of the capital of the country was produced this year,

except as much as may have been this year added to the total

amount. The fact is far otherwise. The greater part, in value, of

the wealth now existing in England has been produced by human

hands within the last twelve months. A very small proportion

indeed of that large aggregate was in existence ten years ago; --

of the present productive capital of the country scarcely any

part, except farm-houses and manufactories, and a few ships and

machines; and even these would not in most cases have survived so

long, if fresh labour had not been employed within that period in

putting them into repair. The land subsists, and the land is

almost the only thing that subsists. Everything which is produced

perishes, and most things very quickly. Most kinds of capital are

not fitted by their nature to be long preserved. There are a few,

and but a few productions, capable of a very prolonged existence.

Westminster Abbey has lasted many centuries, with occasional

repairs; some Grecian sculptures have existed above two thousand

years; the Pyramids perhaps double or treble that time. But these

were objects devoted to unproductive use. If we except bridges

and aqueducts (to which may in some countries be added tanks and

embankments), there are few instances of any edifice applied to

industrial purposes which has been of great duration; such

buildings do not hold out against wear and tear, nor is it good

economy to construct them of the solidity necessary for

permanency. Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by

preservation, but by perpetual reproduction: every part of it is

used and destroyed, generally very soon after it is produced, but

those who consume it are employed meanwhile in producing more.

The growth of capital is similar to the growth of population.

Every individual who is born, dies, but in each year the number

born exceeds the number who die: the population, therefore,

always increases, though not one person of those composing it was

alive until a very recent date.



    7. This perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital

affords the explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the

great rapidity with which countries recover from a state of

devastation; the disappearance, in a short time, of all traces of

the mischiefs done by earthquakes, floods, hurricanes, and the

ravages of war. An enemy lays waste a country by fire and sword,

and destroys or carries away nearly all the moveable wealth

existing in it: all the inhabitants are ruined, and yet in a few

years after, everything is much as it was before. This vis

medicatrix naturae has been a subject of sterile astonishment, or

has been cited to exemplify the wonderful strength of the

principle of saving, which can repair such enormous losses in so

brief an interval. There is nothing at all wonderful in the

matter. What the enemy have destroyed, would have been destroyed

in a little time by the inhabitants themselves: the wealth which

they so rapidly reproduce, would have needed to be reproduced and

would have been reproduced in any case, and probably in as short

a time. Nothing is changed, except that during the reproduction

they have not now the advantage of consuming what had been

produced previously. The possibility of a rapid repair of their

disasters, mainly depends on whether the country has been

depopulated. If its effective population have not been extirpated

at the time, and are not starved afterwards; then, with the same

skill and knowledge which they had before, with their land and

its permanent improvements undestroyed, and the more durable

buildings probably unimpaired, or only partially injured, they

have nearly all the requisites for their former amount of

production. If there is as much of food left to them, or of

valuables to buy food, as enables them by any amount of privation

to remain alive and in working condition, they will in a short

time have raised as great a produce, and acquired collectively as

great wealth and as great a capital, as before; by the mere

continuance of that ordinary amount of exertion which they are

accustomed to employ in their occupations. Nor does this evince

any strength in the principle of saving, in the popular sense of

the term, since what takes place is not intentional abstinence,

but involuntary privation.

    Yet so fatal is the habit of thinking though the medium of

only one set of technical phrases, and so little reason have

studious men to value themselves on being exempt from the very

same mental infirmities which beset the vulgar, that this simple

explanation was never given (so far as I am aware) by any

political economist before Dr. Chalmers; a writer many of whose

opinions I think erroneous, but who has always the merit of

studying phenomena at first hand, and expressing them in a

language of his own, which often uncovers aspects of the truth

that the received phraseologies only tend to hide.



    8. The same author carries out this train of thought to some

important conclusions on another closely connected subject, that

of government loans for war purposes or other unproductive

expenditure. These loans, being drawn from capital (in lieu of

taxes, which would generally have been paid from income, and made

up in part or altogether by increased economy) must, according to

the principles we have laid down, tend to impoverish the country:

yet the years in which expenditure of this sort has been on the

greatest scale, have often been years of great apparent

prosperity.. the wealth and resources of the country, instead of

diminishing, have given every sign of rapid increase during the

process, and of greatly expanded dimensions after its close. This

was confessedly the case with Great Britain during the last long

Continental war; and it would take some space to enumerate all

the unfounded theories in political economy, to which that fact

gave rise, and to which it secured temporary credence; almost all

tending to exalt unproductive expenditure, at the expense of

productive. Without entering into all the causes which operated,

and which commonly do operate, to prevent these extraordinary

drafts on the productive resources of a country from being so

much felt as it might seem reasonable to expect, we will suppose

the most unfavourable case possible: that the whole amount

borrowed and destroyed by the government, was abstracted by the

lender from a productive employment in which it had actually been

invested. The capital, therefore, of the country, is this year

diminished by so much. But unless the amount abstracted is

something enormous, there is no reason in the nature of the case

why next year the national capital should not be as great as

ever. The loan cannot have been taken from that portion of the

capital of the country which consists of tools, machinery, and

buildings. It must have been wholly drawn from the portion

employed in paying labourers: and the labourers will suffer

accordingly. But if none of them are stared; if their wages can

bear such an amount of reduction, or if charity interposes

between them and absolute destitution, there is no reason that

their labour should produce less in the next year than in the

year before. If they produce as much as usual, having been paid

less by so many millions sterling, these millions are gained by

their employers. The breach made in the capital of the country is

thus instantly repaired, but repaired by the privations and often

the real misery of the labouring class. Here is ample reason why

such periods, even in the most unfavourable circumstances, may

easily be times of great gain to those whose prosperity usually

passes, in the estimation of society, for national

prosperity.(3*)

    This leads to the vexed question to which Dr. Chalmers has

very particularly adverted; whether the funds required by a

government for extraordinary unproductive expenditure, are best

raised by loans, the interest only being provided by taxes, Or

whether taxes should be at once laid on to the whole amount;

which is called in the financial vocabulary, raising the whole of

the supplies within the year. Dr. Chalmers is strongly for the

latter method. He says, the common notion is that in calling for

the whole amount in one year, you require what is either

impossible, or very inconvenient; that the people cannot, without

great hardship, pay the whole at once out of their yearly income;

and that it is much better to require of them a small payment

every year in the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice

once for all. To which his answer is, that the sacrifice is made

equally in either case. Whatever is spent, cannot but be drawn

from yearly income. The whole and every part of the wealth

produced in the country, forms, or helps to form, the yearly

income of somebody. The privation which it is supposed must

result from taking the amount in the shape of taxes is not

avoided by taking it in a loan. The suffering is not averted, but

only thrown upon the labouring classes, the least able, and who

least ought, to bear it: while all the inconveniences, physical,

moral, and political, produced by maintaining taxes for the

perpetual payment of the interest, are incurred in pure loss.

Whenever capital is withdrawn from production, or from the fund

destined for production, to be lent to the State, and expended

unproductively, that whole sum is withheld from the labouring

classes: the loan, therefore, is in truth paid off the same year;

the whole of the sacrifice necessary for paying it off is

actually made: only it is paid to the wrong persons, and

therefore does not extinguish the claim; and paid by the very

worst of taxes, a tax exclusively on the labouring class. And

after having, in this most painful and unjust way, gone through

the whole effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the

country remains charged with it, and with the payment of its

interest in perpetuity.

    These views appear to me strictly just, in so far as the

value absorbed in loans would otherwise have been employed in

productive industry within the country. The practical state of

the case, however, seldom exactly corresponds with this

supposition. The loans of the less wealthy countries are made

chiefly with foreign capital, which would not, perhaps, have been

brought in to be invested on any less security than that of the

government: while those of rich and prosperous countries are

generally made, not with funds withdrawn from productive

employment, but with the new accumulations constantly making from

income, and often with a part of them which, if not so taken,

would have migrated to colonies, or sought other investments

abroad. In these cases (which will be more particularly examined

hereafter*), the sum wanted may be obtained by loan without

detriment to the labourers, or derangement of the national

industry, and even perhaps with advantage to both, in comparison

with raising the amount by taxation, since taxes, especially when

heavy, are almost always partly paid at the expense of what would

otherwise have been saved and added to capital. Besides, in a

country which makes so great yearly additions to its wealth that

a part can be taken and expended unproductively without

diminishing capital, or even preventing a considerable increase,

it is evident that even if the whole of what is so taken would

have become capital, and obtained employment in the country, the

effect on the labouring classes is far less prejudicial, and the

case against the loan system much less strong, than in the case

first supposed. This brief anticipation of a discussion which

will find its proper place elsewhere, appeared necessary to

prevent false inferences from the premises previously laid down.



    9. We now pass to a fourth fundamental theorem respecting

Capital, which is, perhaps, oftener overlooked or misconceived

than even any of the foregoing. What supports and employs

productive labour, is the capital expended in setting it to work,

and not the demand of purchasers for the produce of the labour

when completed. Demand for commodities is not demand for labour.

The demand for commodities determines in what particular branch

of production the labour and capital shall be employed; it

determines the direction of the labour; but not the more or less

of the labour itself, or of the maintenance or payment of the

labour. These depend on the amount of the capital, or other funds

directly devoted to the sustenance and remuneration of labour.

    Suppose, for instance, that there is a demand for velvet; a

fund ready to be laid out in buying velvet, but no capital to

establish the manufacture. It is of no consequence how great the

demand may be; unless capital is attracted into the occupation,

there will be no velvet made, and consequently none bought;

unless, indeed, the desire of the intending purchaser for it is

so strong, that he employs part of the price he would have paid

for it, in making advances to work-people, that they may employ

themselves in making velvet; that is, unless he converts part of

his income into capital, and invests that capital in the

manufacture. Let us now reverse the hypothesis, and suppose that

there is plenty of capital ready for making velvet, but no

demand. Velvet will not be made; but there is no particular

preference on the part of capital for making velvet.

Manufacturers and their labourers do not produce for the pleasure

of their customers, but for the supply of their own wants, and

having still the capital and the labour which are the essentials

of production, they can either produce something else which is in

demand, or if there be no other demand, they themselves have one,

and can produce the things which they want for their own

consumption. So that the employment afforded to labour does not

depend on the purchasers, but on the capital. I am, of course,

not taking into consideration the effects of a sudden change. If

the demand ceases unexpectedly, after the commodity to supply it

is already produced, this introduces a different element into the

question: the capital has actually been consumed in producing

something which nobody wants or uses, and it has therefore

perished, and the employment which it gave to labour is at an

end, not because there is no longer a demand, but because there

is no longer a capital. This case therefore does not test the

principle. The proper test is, to suppose that the change is

gradual and foreseen, and is attended with no waste of capital,

the manufacture being discontinued by merely not replacing the

machinery as it wears out, and not reinvesting the money as it

comes in from the sale of the produce. The capital is thus ready

for a new employment, in which it will maintain as much labour as

before. The manufacturer and his work-people lose the benefit of

the skill and knowledge which they had acquired in the particular

business, and which can only be partially of use to them in any

other; and that is the amount of loss to the community by the

change. But the labourers can still work, and the capital which

previously employed them will, either in the same hands, or by

being lent to others, employ either those labourers or an

equivalent number in some other occupation.

    This theorem, that to purchase produce is not to employs

labour; that the demand for labour is constituted by the wages

which precede the production, and not by the demand which may

exist for the commodities resulting from the production; is a

proposition which greatly needs all the illustration it can

receive. It is, to common apprehension, a paradox; and even among

political economists of reputation, I can hardly point to any,

except Mr. Ricardo and M. Say, who have kept it constantly and

steadily in view. Almost all others occasionally express

themselves as if a person who buys commodities, the produce of

labour, was an employer of labour, and created a demand for it as

really, and in the same sense, as if he bought the labour itself

directly, by the payment of wages. It is no wonder that political

economy advances slowly, when such a question as this still

remains open at its very threshold. I apprehend, that if by

demand for labour be meant the demand by which wages are raised,

or the number of labourers in employment increased, demand for

commodities does not constitute demand for labour. I conceive

that a person who buys commodities and consumes them himself,

does no good to the labouring classes; and that it is only by

what he abstains from consuming, and expends in direct payments

to labourers in exchange for labour, that he benefits the

labouring classes, or adds anything to the amount of their

employment.

    For the better illustration of the principle, let us put the

following case. A consumer may expend his income either in buying

services, or commodities. He may employ part of it in hiring

journeymen bricklayers to build a house, or excavators to dig

artificial lakes, or labourers to make plantations and lay out

pleasure grounds; or, instead of this, he may expend the same

value in buying velvet and lace. The question is, whether the

difference between these two modes of expending his income

affects the interest of the labouring classes. It is plain that

in the first of the two cases he employs labourers, who will be

out of employment, or at least out of that employment, in the

opposite case. But those from whom I differ say that this is of

no consequence, because in buying velvet and lace he equally

employs labourers, namely, those who make the velvet and lace. I

contend, however, that in this last case he does not employ

labourers; but merely decides in what kind of work some other

person shall employ them. The consumer does not with his own

funds pay to the weavers and lacemakers their day's wages. He

buys the finished commodity, which has been produced by labour

and capital, the labour not being paid nor the capital furnished

by him, but by the manufacturer. Suppose that he had been in the

habit of expending this portion of his income in hiring

journeymen bricklayers, who laid out the amount of their wages in

food and clothing, which were also produced by labour and

capital. He, however, determines to prefer velvet, for which he

thus creates an extra demand. This demand cannot be satisfied

without an extra supply, nor can the supply be produced without

an extra capital: where, then, is the capital to come from? There

is nothing in the consumer's change of purpose which makes the

capital of the country greater than it otherwise was. It appears,

then, that the increased demand for velvet could not for the

present be supplied, were it not that the very circumstance which

gave rise to it has set at liberty a capital of the exact amount

required. The very sum which the consumer now employs in buying

velvet, formerly passed into the hands of journeymen bricklayers,

who expended it in food and necessaries, which they now either go

without, or squeeze by their competition, from the shares of

other labourers. The labour and capital, therefore, which

formerly produced necessaries for the use of these bricklayers,

are deprived of their market, and must look out for other

employment; and they find it in making velvet for the new demand.

I do not mean that the very same labour and capital which

produced the necessaries turn themselves to producing the velvet;

but, in some one or other of a hundred modes, they take the place

of that which does. There was capital in existence to do one of

two things to make the velvet, or to produce necessaries for the

journeymen bricklayers; but not to do both. It was at the option

of the consumer which of the two should happen; and if he chooses

the velvet, they go without the necessaries.

    For further illustration, let us suppose the same case

reversed. The consumer has been accustomed to buy velvet, but

resolves to discontinue that expense, and to employ the same

annual sum in hiring bricklayers. If the common opinion be

correct, this change in the mode of his expenditure gives no

additional employment to labour, but only transfers employment

from velvet-makers to bricklayers. On closer inspection, however,

it will be seen that there is an increase of the total sum

applied to the remuneration of labour. The velvet manufacturer,

supposing him aware of the diminished demand for his commodity,

diminishes the production, and sets at liberty a corresponding

portion of the capital employed in the manufacture. This capital,

thus withdrawn from the maintenance of velvet-makers, is not the

same fund with that which the customer employs in maintaining

bricklayers; it is a second fund. There are, therefore, two funds

to be employed in the maintenance and remuneration of labour,

where before there was only one. There is not a transfer of

employment from velvet-makers to bricklayers; there is a new

employment created for bricklayers, and a transfer of employment

from velvet-makers to some other labourers, most probably those

who produce the food and other things which the bricklayers

consume.

    In answer to this it is said, that though money laid out in

buying velvet is not capital, it replaces a capital; that though

it does not create a new demand for labour, it is the necessary

means of enabling the existing demand to be kept up. The funds

(it may be said) of the manufacturer, while locked up in velvet,

cannot be directly applied to the maintenance of labour; they do

not begin to constitute a demand for labour until the velvet is

sold, and the capital which made it replaced from the outlay of

the purchaser; and thus, it may be said, the velvet-maker and the

velvet-buyer have not two capitals, but only one capital between

them, which by the act of purchase the buyer transfers to the

manufacturer, and if instead of buying velvet he buys labour, he

simply transfers this capital elsewhere, extinguishing as much

demand for labour in one quarter as he creates in another.

    The premises of this argument are not denied. To set free a

capital which would otherwise be locked up in a form useless for

the support of labour, is, no doubt, the same thing to the

interests of labourers as the creation of a new capital. It is

perfectly true that if I expend 1000l. in buying velvet, I enable

the manufacturer to employ 1000l. in the maintenance of labour,

which could not have been so employed while the velvet remained

unsold: and if it would have remained unsold for ever unless I

bought it, then by changing my purpose, and hiring bricklayers

instead, I undoubtedly create no new demand for labour: for while

I employ 1 000l. in hiring labour on the one hand, I annihilate

for ever 1000l. of the velvet-maker's capital on the other. But

this is confounding the effects arising from the mere suddenness

of a change with the effects of the change itself. If when the

buyer ceased to purchase, the capital employed in making velvet

for his use necessarily perished, then his expending the same

amount in hiring bricklayers would be no creation, but merely a

transfer, of employment. The increased employment which I contend

is given to labour, would not be given unless the capital of the

velvet-maker could be liberated, and would not be given until it

was liberated. But every one knows that the capital invested in

an employment can be withdrawn from it, if sufficient time be

allowed. If the velvet-maker had previous notice, by not

receiving the usual order, he will have produced 1000l. less

velvet, and an equivalent portion of his capital will have been

already set free. If he had no previous notice, and the article

consequently remains on his hands, the increase of his stock will

induce him next year to suspend or diminish his production until

the surplus is caRed off. When this process is complete, the

manufacturer will find himself as rich as before, with

undiminished power of employing labour in general, though a

portion of his capital will now be employed in maintaining some

other kind of it. Until this adjustment has taken place, the

demand for labour will be merely changed, not increased: but as

soon as it has taken place, the demand for labour is increased.

Where there was formerly only one capital employed in maintaining

weavers to make 1000l. worth of velvet, there is now that same

capital employed in making something else, and 1000l. distributed

among bricklayers besides. There are now two capitals employed in

remunerating two sets of labourers; while before, one of those

capitals, that of the customer, only served as a wheel in the

machinery by which the other capital, that of the manufacturer,

carried on its employment of labour from year to year.

    The proposition for which I am contending is in reality

equivalent to the following, which to some minds will appear a

truism, though to others it is a paradox: that a person does good

to labourers, not by what he consumes on himself, but solely by

what he does not so consume. If instead of laying out 100l. in

wine or silk, I expend it in wages, the demand for commodities is

precisely equal in both cases: in the one, it is a demand for

100l. worth of wine or silk, in the other, for the same value of

bread, beer, labourers' clothing, fuel, and indulgences: but the

labourers of the community have in the latter case the value of

100l. more of the produce of the community distributed among

them. I have consumed that much less, and made over my consuming

power to them. If it were not so, my having consumed less would

not leave more to be consumed by others; which is a manifest

contradiction. When less is not produced, what one person

forbears to consume is necessarily added to the share of those to

whom he transfers his power of purchase. In the case supposed I

do not necessarily consume less ultimately, since the labourers

whom I pay may build a house for me, or make something else for

my future consumption. But I have at all events postponed my

consumption, and have turned over part of my share of the present

produce of the community to the labourers. If after an interval I

am indemnified, it is not from the existing produce, but from a

subsequent addition made to it. I have therefore left more of the

existing produce to be consumed by others; and have put into the

possession of labourers the power to consume it.

    There cannot be a better reductio ad absurdum of the opposite

doctrine than that afforded by the Poor Law. If it be equally for

the benefit of the labouring classes whether I consume my means

in the form of things purchased for my own use, or set aside a

portion in the shape of wages or alms for their direct

consumption, on what ground can the policy be justified of taking

my money from me to support paupers? since my unproductive

expenditure would have equally benefited them, while I should

have enjoyed it too. If society can both eat its cake and have

it, why should it not be allowed the double indulgence? But

common sense tells every one in his own case (though he does not

see it on the larger scale), that the poor rate which he pays is

really subtracted from his own consumption, and that no shifting

of payment backwards and forwards will enable two persons to eat

the same food. If he had not been required to pay the rate, and

had consequently laid out the amount on himself, the poor would

have had as much less for their share of the total produce of the

country, as he himself would have consumed more.(4*)

    It appears, then, that a demand delayed until the work is

completed, and furnishing no advances, but only reimbursing

advances made by others, contributes nothing to the demand for

labour; and that what is so expended, is, in all its effects, so

far as regards the employment of the labouring class, a mere

nullity; it does not and cannot create any employment except at

the expense of other employment which existed before.

    But though a demand for velvet does nothing more in regard to

the employment for labour and capital, than to determine so much

of the employment which already existed, into that particular

channel instead of any other; still, to the producers already

engaged in the velvet manufacture, and not intending to quit it,

this is of the utmost importance. To them, a falling off in the

demand is a real loss, and one which, even if none of their goods

finally perish unsold, may mount to any height, up to that which

would make them choose, as the smaller evil, to retire from the

business. On the contrary, an increased demand enables them to

extend their transactions -- to make a profit on a larger

capital, if they have it, or can borrow it; and, turning over

their capital more rapidly, they will employ their labourers more

constantly, or employ a greater number than before. So that an

increased demand for a commodity does really, in the particular

department, often cause a greater employment to be given to

labour by the same capital. The mistake lies in not perceiving

that in the cases supposed, this advantage is given to labour and

capital in one department, only by being withdrawn from another;

and that when the change has produced its natural effect of

attracting into the employment additional capital proportional to

the increased demand, the advantage itself ceases.

    The grounds of a proposition, when well understood, usually

give a tolerable indication of the limitations of it. The general

principle, now stated, is that demand for commodities Determines

merely the direction of labour, and the kind of wealth produced,

but not the quantity or efficiency of the labour, or the

aggregate of wealth. But to this there are two exceptions. First,

when labour is supported, but not fully occupied, a new demand

for something which it can produce, may stimulate the labour thus

supported to increased exertions, of which the result may be an

increase of wealth, to the advantage of the labourers themselves

and of others. Work which can be done in the spare hours of

persons subsisted from some other source, can (as before

remarked) be undertaken without withdrawing capital from other

occupations, beyond the amount (often very small) required to

cover the expense of tools and materials, and even this will

often be provided by savings made expressly for the purpose. The

reason of our theorem thus failing, the theorem itself fails, and

employment of this kind may, by the springing up of a demand for

the commodity, be called into existence without depriving labour

of an equivalent amount of employment in any other quarter. The

demand does not, even in this case, operate on labour any

otherwise than through the medium of an existing capital, but it

affords an inducement which causes that capital to set in motion

a greater amount of labour than it did before.

    The second exception, of which I shall speak at length in a

subsequent chapter, consists in the known effect of an extension

of the market for a commodity, in rendering possible an increased

development of the division of labour, and hence a more effective

distribution of the productive forces of society. This, like the

former, is more an exception. in appearance than it is in

reality. It is not the money paid by the purchaser, which

remunerates the labour; it is the capital of the producer: the

demand only determines in what manner that capital shall be

employed, and what kind of labour it shall remunerate; but if it

determines that the commodity shall be produced on a large scale,

it enables the same capital to produce more of the commodity, and

may by an indirect effect in causing an increase of capital,

produce an eventual increase of the remuneration of the labourer.

    The demand for commodities is a consideration of importance

rather in the theory of exchange, than in that of production.

Looking at things in the aggregate, and permanently, the

remuneration of the producer is derived from the productive power

of his own capital. The sale of the produce for money, and the

subsequent expenditure of the money in buying other commodities,

are a mere exchange of equivalent values for mutual

accommodation. It is true that, the division of employments being

one of the principal means of increasing the productive power of

labour, the power of exchanging gives rise to a great increase of

the produce; but even then it is production, not exchange, which

remunerates labour and capital. We cannot too strictly represent

to ourselves the operation of exchange, whether conducted by

barter or through the medium of money, as the mere mechanism by

which each person transforms the remuneration of his labour or of

his capital into the particular shape in which it is most

convenient to him to possess it; but in no wise the source of the

remuneration itself.



    10. The preceding principles demonstrate the fallacy of many

popular arguments and doctrines, which are continually

reproducing themselves in new forms. For example, it has been

contended, and by some from whom better things might have been

expected, that the argument for the income-tax, grounded on its

falling on the higher and middle classes only, and sparing the

poor, is an error; some have gone so far as to say, an imposture;

because in taking from the rich what they would have expended

among the poor, the tax injures the poor as much as if it had

been directly levied from them. Of this doctrine we now know what

to think. So far, indeed, as what is taken from the rich in

taxes, would, if not so taken, have been saved and converted into

capital, or even expended in the maintenance and wages of

servants or of any class of unproductive labourers, to that

extent the demand for labour is no doubt diminished, and the poor

injuriously affected, by the tax on the rich; and as these

effects are almost always produced in a greater or less degree,

it is impossible so to tax the rich as that no portion whatever

of the tax can fall on the poor. But even here the question

arises, whether the government, after receiving the amount, will

not lay out as great a portion of it in the direct purchase of

labour, as the taxpayers would have done. In regard to all that

portion of the tax, which, if not paid to the government, would

have been consumed in the form of commodities (or even expended

in services if the payment has been advanced by a capitalist),

this, according to the principles we have investigated, falls

definitively on the rich, and not at all on the poor. There is

exactly the same demand for labour, so far as this portion is

concerned, after the tax, as before it. The capital which

hitherto employed the labourers of the country, remains, and is

still capable of employing the same number. There is the same

amount of produce paid in wages, or allotted to defray the

feeding and clothing of labourers.

    If those against whom I am now contending were in the right,

it would be impossible to tax anybody except the poor. If it is

taxing the labourers, to tax what is laid out in the produce of

labour, the labouring classes pay all the taxes. The same

argument, however, equally proves, that it is impossible to tax

the labourers at all; since the tax, being laid out either in

labour or in commodities, comes all back to them; so that

taxation has the singular proper of falling on nobody. On the

same showing, it would do the labourers no harm to take from them

all they have, and distribute it among the other members of the

community. It would all be "spent among them," which on this

theory comes to the same thing. The error is produced by not

looking directly at the realities of the phenomena, but attending

only to the outward mechanism of paying and spending. If we look

at the effects produced not on the money, which merely changes

hands, but on the commodities which are used and consumed, we see

that, in consequence of the income-tax, the classes who pay it do

really diminish their consumption. Exactly so far as they do

this, they are the persons on whom the tax falls. It is defrayed

out of what they would otherwise have used and enjoyed. So far,

on the other hand, as the burthen falls, not on what they would

have consumed, but on what they would have saved to maintain

production, or spent in maintaining or paying unproductive

labourers, to that extent the tax forms a deduction from what

would have been used and enjoyed by the labouring classes. But if

the government, as is probably the fact, expends fully as much of

the amount as the tax-payers would have done in the direct

employment of labour, as in hiring sailors, soldiers, and

policemen, or in paying off debt, by which last operation it even

increases capital; the labouring classes not only do not lose any

employment by the tax, but may possibly gain some, and the whole

of the tax falls exclusively where it was intended.

    All that portion of the produce of the country which any one,

not a labourer, actually and literally consumes for his own use,

does not contribute in the smallest degree to the maintenance of

labour. No one is benefited by mere consumption, except the

person who consumes. And a person cannot both consume his income

himself, and make it over to be consumed by others. Taking away a

certain portion by taxation cannot deprive both him and them of

it, but only him or them. To know which is the sufferer, we must

understand whose consumption will have to be retrenched in

consequence: this, whoever it be, is the person on whom the tax

really falls.





NOTES:



1. An exception must be admitted when the industry created or

upheld by the restrictive law belongs to the class of what are

called domestic manufactures. These being carried on by persons

already fed -- by labouring families, inthe intervals of other

employment -- no transfer of capital tothe occupation is

necessary to its being undertaken, beyond the value of the

materials and tools, which is often inconsiderable. If,

therefore, a protecting duty causes this occupation to be carried

on, when it otherwise would not, there is in this case a real

increase of the production of the country.

    In order to render our theoretical proposition invulnerable,

this peculiar case must be allowed for; but it does not touch the

practical doctrine of free trade. Domestic manufactures cannot,

from the very nature of things, require protection, since the

substance of the labourers being provided from other sources, the

price of the product, however much it may be reduced, is nearly

all clear gain. If, therefore, the domestic producers retire from

the competition, it is never from necessity, but because the

product is not worth the labour it costs, in the opinion of the

best judges, those who enjoy the one and undergo the other. They

prefer the sacrifice of buying their clothing to the labour of

making it. They will not continue their labour unless society

will give them more for it, than in thier own opinion its product

is worth.



2. It is worth while to direct attention to several circumstances

which to a certain extent diminish the detriment caused to the

general wealth by the prodigality of individuals, or raise up a

compensation, more or less ample, as a consequence of the

detriment itself. One of these is, that spendthrifts do not

usually succeed in consuming all they spend. Their habitual

carelessness as to expenditure causes them to be cheated and

robbed on all quarters, often by persons of frugal habits. Large

accumulations are continually made by agents, stewards, and even

domestic servants, of improvident persons of fortune; and they

pay much higher prices for all purchases than people of careful

habits, which accounts for their being popular as customers. They

are, therefore, acutally not able to get into their possession

and destroy a quantity of wealth by any means equivalent to the

fortune which they dissipate. Much of it is merely transferred to

others, by whom a part may be saved. Another thing to be observed

is, that the prodigality of some may reduce others to a forced

economy. Suppose a sudden demand for some article of luxury,

caused by the caprice of a prodigal, which not having been

calculated on beforehand, there has been no increase of the usual

supply. The price will rise; and may rise beyond the means or the

inclinations of some of the habitual consumers, who may in

consequence forego their accustomed indulgence,and save the

amount. If they do not, but continue to expend as great a value

as before on the commodity, the dealers in it obtain, for only

the same quantity of the article, a return increased by the whole

of what the spendthrift has paid; and thus the amount which he

loses is transferred bodily to them, and may be added to their

capital; his increased personal consumption being made up by the

privations of the other purchasers, who have obtained less than

usual of their accustomed gratification for the same equivalent.

On the other hand, a counter-process must be going on somewhere,

since the prodigal must have diminished his purchases in some

other quarter to balance the augmentation in this; he has perhaps

called in funds employed in sustaining productive labour, and the

dealers in subsistence and in the instruments of production have

had commodities left on their hands, or have received, for the

usual amount of commodities, a less than usual return. But such

losses of income or capital, by industrious persons, except when

of extraordinary amount, are generally made up by increasing

pinching and privation; so that the capital of the community may

not be, on the whole, impaired, and the prodigal may have had his

self-indulgence at the expense not of the permanent resources,

but of the temporary pleasures and comforts of others. For in

every case the community are poorer by what any one spends,

unless others are in consequence led to curtail their spending.

There are yet other and more recondite ways in which the

profusion of some may bring about its compensation in the extra

savings of others; but these can only be considered in that part

of the Fourth Book, which treats of the limiting principle to the

accumulation of capital.



3. On the other hand,it must be remembered that war abstracts

from productive employment not only capital, but likewise

labourers; that the funds withdrawn from the renumeration of

productive labourers are partly employed in paying the same or

other individuals for unproductive labour; and that by this

portion of its effects, war expenditure acts in precisely the

opposite manner to that which Dr. Chalmers points out, and, so

far as it goes, directly counteracts the effects described in the

text. So far as labourers are taken from production, to man the

army and navy, the labouring classes are not damaged, the

capitalists are not benefited, and the general produce of the

country is diminished, by war expenditure. Accordingly, Dr.

Chalmers's doctrine, though true of this country, is wholly

inapplicable to countries differently circumstanced; to France,

for example, during the Napoleon wars. At that period the draught

on the labouring population of France, for a long series of

years, was enormous, while the funds which supported the war were

mostly supplied by contributions levied on the countries overrun

by the French arms, a very small proportion alone consisting of

French capital. In France, accordingly, the wages of labour did

not fall, but rose; the employers of labour were not benefited,

but injured; while the wealth of the country was impaired by the

suspension or total loss of so vast an amount of its productive

labour. In England all this was reversed. England employed

comparatively few additional soldiers and sailors of her own,

while she diverted hundreds of millions of capital from

productive employment, to supply munitions of war and support

armies for her Continental allies. Consequently, as shown in the

text, her labourers suffered, her capitalists prospered, and her

permanent productive resources did not fall off.



4. The following case, which presents the argument in a somewhat

different shape, may serve for still further illustration.

    Suppose that a rich individual, A, expends a certain amount

daily in wages or alms, which, as soon as received, is expended

and consumed, in the form of coarse food, by the receivers. A

dies, leaving his property to B, who discontinues this item of

expenditure, and expends in lieu of it the same sum each day in

delicacies for his own table, I have chosen this supposition, in

order tht the two cases may be similar in all their

circumstances, except that which is the subject of comparison. In

order not to obscure the essential facts of the case by

exhibiting them through the hazy medium of a money transaction,

let us further suppose that A, and B after him, are landlords of

the estate on which both the food consumed by the recipients of

A's disbursements, and the articles of luxury supplied for B's

table, are produced; and that their rent is paid to them in kind,

they giving previous notice what description of produce they

shall require. The question is, whether B's expenditure gives as

much employment or as much food to his poorer neighbours as A's

gave.

    From the case as stated, it seems to follow that while A

lived, that portion of his income which he expended in wages or

alms, would be drawn by him from the farm in the shape of food

for labourers, and would be used as such; while B, who came after

him, would require, instead of this, an equivalent value in

expensive articles of food, to be consumed in his own household:

that the farmer, therefore, would, under B's regime, produce that

much less of ordinary food, and more of expensive delicacies, for

each day of the year,than was produced in A's time, and that

there would be that amount less of food shared, throughout the

year, among the labouring and poorer classes. This is what would

be conformable to the principles laid down in the text. Those who

think differently, must, on the other hand, suppose that the

luxuries required by B would be produced, not instead of, but in

addition to, the food previously supplied to A's labourers, and

that the aggregate produce of the country would be increased in

amount. But when it is asked, how this double production would be

effected, would be enabled to supply the new wants of B, without

producing less of other things; the only mode which presents

itself is, that he should first produce the food, and then,

giving that food to the labourers whom A formerly fed, should by

means of their labour, produce the luxuries wanted by B. This

accordingly, when the objectors are hard pressed, appears to be

really their meaning. But it is an obvious answer, that on this

supposition, B must wait for his luxuries till the second year,

and they are wanted this year. By the original hypothesis, he

consumes his luxurious dinner day by day, pari passu with the

rations of bread and potatoes formerly served out by A to his

labourers. There is not time to feed the labourers first, and

supply B afterwards: he and they cannot both have their wants

ministered to: he can only satisfy his own demand for

commodities, by leaving as much of theirs, as was formerly

supplied from that fund, unsatisfied.

    It may, indeed, be rejoined by an objector, that since, on

the present showing, time is the only thing wanting to render the

expenditure of B consistent with as large an employment to labour

as was given by A, why may we not suppose that B postpones his

increased consumption of personal luxuries until they can be

furnished to him by the labour of the persons whom A employed? In

that case, it may be said, he would employ and feed as much

labour as his predecessors. Undoubtedly he would; but why?

Because his income would be expended in exactly the same manner

as his predecessor's; it would be expended in wages. A reserved

from his personal consumption a fund which he paid away directly

to labourers; B does the same, only instead of paying it to them

himself, he leaves in the hands of the farmer, who pays it to

them for him. On this supposition, B, in the first year, neither

expending the amount, as far as he is personally concerned, in

A's manner nor in his own, really saves that portion of his

income, and lends it to the farmer. And if, in subsequent years,

confining himself within the year's income, he leaves the farmer

in arrears to that amount, it becomes an additional capital, with

which the farmer may permanently employ and feed A's labourers.

Nobody pretends that such a change as this, a change from

spending an income in wages of labour, to saving it for

investment, deprives any labourers of employment. What is

affirmed to have that effect is, the change from hiring labourers

to buying commodities for personal use; as represented by our

original hypothesis.

    In our illustration we have supposed no buying and selling,

or use of money. But the case as we have put it, corresponds with

actual fact in everything except the details of the mechanism.

The whole of any country is virtually a single farm and

manufactory, from which every member of the community draws his

appointed share of the produce, having a certain number of

counters, called pounds sterling, put into his hands, which, at

his convenience, he brings back and exchanges for such goods as

he prefers, up to the limit of the amount. He does not, as in our

imaginary case, give notice beforehand what things he shall

require; but the dealers and producers are quite capable of

finding it out by observation, and any change in the demand is

promptly followed by an adaptation of the supply to it. If a

consumer changes from paying away a part of his income in wages,

to spending it that same day (not some subsequent and distant

day) in things for his own consumption, and perseveres in this

altered practice until production has had time to adapt itself to

the alteration of demand, there will from that time be less food

and other articles for the use of labourers, produced in the

country, by exactly the value of the extra luxuries now demanded;

and the labourers, as a class, will be worse off by the precise

amount.


