



   BOOK II: OF THEIR MAGISTRATES

      THIRTY families choose every year a magistrate, who was anciently 
      called the syphogrant, but is now called the philarch; and over 
      every ten syphogrants, with the families subject to them, there is 
      another magistrate, who was anciently called the tranibor, but of 
      late the archphilarch. All the syphogrants, who are in number 200, 
      choose the Prince out of a list of four, who are named by the 
      people of the four divisions of the city; but they take an oath 
      before they proceed to an election, that they will choose him whom 
      they think most fit for the office. They give their voices 
      secretly, so that it is not known for whom everyone gives his 
      suffrage. The Prince is for life, unless he is removed upon 
      suspicion of some design to enslave the people. The tranibors are 
      new-chosen every year, but yet they are for the most part 
      continued. All their other magistrates are only annual. The 
      tranibors meet every third day, and oftener if necessary, and 
      consult with the prince, either concerning the affairs of the 
      State in general or such private differences as may arise 
      sometimes among the people; though that falls out but seldom. 
      There are always two syphogrants called into the council-chamber, 
      and these are changed every day. It is a fundamental rule of their 
      government that no conclusion can be made in anything that relates 
      to the public till it has been first debated three several days in 
      their Council. It is death for any to meet and consult concerning 
      the State, unless it be either in their ordinary Council, or in 
      the assembly of the whole body of the people.

      These things have been so provided among them, that the prince and 
      the tranibors may not conspire together to change the government 
      and enslave the people; and therefore when anything of great 
      importance is set on foot, it is sent to the syphogrants; who 
      after they have communicated it to the families that belong to 
      their divisions, and have considered it among themselves, make 
      report to the Senate; and upon great occasions, the matter is 
      referred to the Council of the whole island. One rule observed in 
      their Council, is, never to debate a thing on the same day in 
      which it is first proposed; for that is always referred to the 
      next meeting, that so men may not rashly, and in the heat of 
      discourse, engage themselves too soon, which might bias them so 
      much, that instead of consulting the good of the public, they 
      might rather study to support their first opinions, and by a 
      perverse and preposterous sort of shame, hazard their country 
      rather than endanger their own reputation, or venture the being 
      suspected to have wanted foresight in the expedients that they at 
      first proposed. And therefore to prevent this, they take care that 
      they may rather be deliberate than sudden in their motions.



