The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 5

Chapter 8

Of the Ordinary Functions of Government, considered as to their
Economical Effects

    1. Before we discuss the line of demarcation between the
things with which government should, and those with which they
should not, directly interfere, it is necessary to consider the
economical effects, whether of a bad or of a good complexion,
arising from the manner in which they acquit themselves of the
duties which devolve on them in all societies, and which no one
denies to be incumbent on them. 
    The first of these is the protection of person and property.
There is no need to expatiate on the influence exercised over the
economical interests of society by the degree of completeness
with which this duty of government is performed. Insecurity of
person and property, is as much as to say, uncertainty of the
connexion between all human exertion or sacrifice, and the
attainment of the ends for the sake of which they are undergone.
It means, uncertainty whether they who sow shall reap, whether
they who produce shall consume, and they who spare to-day shall
enjoy to.morrow. It means, not only that labour and frugality are
not the road to acquisition, but that violence is. When person
and property are to a certain degree insecure, all the
possessions of the weak are at the mercy of the strong. No one
can keep what he has produced, unless he is more capable of
defending it, than others who give no part of their time and
exertions to useful industry are of taking it from him. The
productive classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a
certain point, being unequal to their own protection against the
predatory population, are obliged to place themselves
individually in a state of dependence on some member of the
predatory class, that it may be his interest to shield them from
all depredation except his own. In this manner, in the Middle
Ages, allodial property generally became feudal, and numbers of
the poorer freemen voluntarily made themselves and their
posterity serfs of some military lord. 
    Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security
of person and property, the importance which is justly due to it,
we must not forget that even for economical purposes there are
other things quite as indispensable, the presence of which will
often make up for a very considerable degree of imperfection in
the protective arrangements of government. As was observed in a
previous chapter, the free cities of Italy, Flanders, and the
Hanseatic league, were habitually in a state of such internal
turbulence, varied by such destructive external wars, that person
and property enjoyed very imperfect protection; yet during
several centuries they increased rapidly in wealth and
prosperity, brought many of the industrial arts to a high degree
of advancement, carried on distant and dangerous voyages of
exploration and commerce with extraordinary success, became an
overmatch in power for the greatest feudal lords, and could
defend themselves even against the sovereigns of Europe: because
in the midst of turmoil and violence, the citizens of those towns
enjoyed a certain rude freedom, under conditions of union and
co-operation, which, taken together, made them a brave,
energetic, and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount
of public spirit and patriotism. The prosperity of these and
other free states in a lawless age, shows that a certain degree
of insecurity, in some combinations of circumstances, has good as
well as bad effects, by making energy and practical ability the
conditions of safety. Insecurity paralyses, only when it is such
in nature and in degree, that no energy of which mankind in
general are capable, affords any tolerable means of
self-protection. And this is a main reason why oppression by the
government, whose power is generally irresistible by any efforts
that can be made by individuals, has so much more baneful an
effect on the springs of national prosperity, than almost any
degree of lawlessness and turbulence under free institutions.
Nations have acquired some wealth, and made some progress in
improvement, in states of social union so imperfect as to border
on anarchy: but no countries in which the people were exposed
without limit to  arbitrary exactions from the officers of
government, ever yet continued to have industry or wealth. A few
generations of such a government never fail to extinguish both.
Some of the fairest, and once the most prosperous, regions of the
earth, have, under the Roman and afterwards under the Turkish
dominion, been reduced to a desert, solely by that cause. I say
solely, because they would have recovered with the utmost
rapidity, as countries always do, from the devastations of war,
or any other temporary calamities. Difficulties and hardships are
often but an incentive to exertion: what is fatal to it, is the
belief that it will not be suffered to produce its fruits. 

    2. Simple over.taxation by government, though a great evil,
is not comparable in the economical part of its mischiefs to
exactions much more moderate in amount, which either subject the
contributor to the arbitrary mandate of government officers, or
are so laid on as to place skill, industry, and frugality at a
disadvantage. The burthen of taxation in our own country is very
great, yet as every one knows its limit, and is seldom made to
pay more than he expects and calculates on, and as the modes of
taxation are not of such a kind as much to impair the motives to
industry and economy, the sources of prosperity are little
diminished by the pressure of taxation; they may even, as some
think, be increased, by the extra exertions made to compensate
for the pressure of the taxes. But in the barbarous despotisms of
many countries of the East, where taxation consists in fastening
upon those who have succeeded in acquiring something, in order to
confiscate it, unless the possessor buys its release by
submitting to give some large sum as a compromise, we cannot
expect to find voluntary industry, or wealth derived from any
source but plunder. And even in comparatively civilized
countries, bad modes of raising a revenue have had effects
similar in kind, though in an inferior degree. French writers
before the Revolution represented the taille as a main cause of
the backward state of agriculture, and of the wretched condition
of the rural population; not from its amount, but because, being
proportioned to the visible capital of the cultivator, it gave
him a motive for appearing poor, which sufficed to turn the scale
in favour of indolence. The arbitrary powers also of fiscal
officers, of intendants and subdelegues, were more destructive of
prosperity than a far larger amount of exactions, because they
destroyed security: there was a marked superiority in the
condition of the pays d'etats, which were exempt from this
scourge. The universal venality ascribed to Russian
functionaries, must be an immense drag on the capabilities of
economical improvement possessed so abundantly by the Russian
empire: since the emoluments of public officers must depend on
the success with which they can multiply vexations, for the
purpose of being bought off by bribes. 
    Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated by
uncertainty, is, independently of its injustice, a serious
economical evil. It may be carried so far as to discourage
industry by insufficiency of reward. Very long before it reaches
this point, it prevents or greatly checks accumulation, or causes
the capital accumulated to be sent for investment to foreign
countries. Taxes which fall on profits, even though that kind of
income may not pay more than its just share, necessarily diminish
the motive to any saving, except for investment in foreign
countries where profits are higher. Holland, for example, seems
to have long ago reached the practical minimum of profits:
already in the last century her wealthy capitalists had a great
part of their fortunes invested in the loans and joint.stock
speculations of other countries: and this low rate of profit is
ascribed to the heavy taxation, which had been in some measure
forced on her by the circumstances of her position and history.
The taxes indeed, besides their great amount, were many of them
on necessaries, a kind of tax peculiarly injurious to industry
and accumulation. But when the aggregate amount of taxation is
very great, it is inevitable that recourse must be had for part
of it to taxes of an objectionable character. And any taxes on
consumption, when heavy, even if not operating on profits, have
something of the same effect, by driving persons of moderate
means to live abroad, often taking their capital with them.
Although I by no means join with those political economists who
think no state of national existence desirable in which there is
not a rapid increase of wealth, I cannot overlook the many
disadvantages to an independent nation from being brought pre.
maturely to a stationary state, while the neighbouring countries
continue advancing. 

    3. The subject of protection to person and property,
considered as afforded by government, ramifies widely, into a
number of indirect channels. It embraces, for example, the whole
subject of the perfection or inefficiency of the means provided
for the ascertainment of rights and the redress of injuries.
Person and property cannot be considered secure where the
administration of justice is imperfect, either from defect of
integrity or capacity in the tribunals, or because the delays,
vexation, and expense accompanying their operation impose a heavy
tax on those who appeal to them, and make it preferable to submit
to any endurable amount of the evils which they are designed to
remedy. In England there is no fault to be found with the
administration of justice, in point of pecuniary integrity; a
result which the progress of social improvement may also be
supposed to have brought about in several other nations of
Europe. But legal and judicial imperfections of other kinds are
abundant; and, in England especially, are a large abatement from
the value of the services which the government renders back to
the people in return for our enormous taxation. In the first
place, the incognoscibility (as Bentham termed it) of the law,
and its extreme uncertainty, even to those who best know it,
render a resort to the tribunals often necessary for obtaining
justice, when, there being no dispute as to facts, no litigation
ought to be required. In the next place, the procedure of the
tribunals is so replete with delay, vexation, and expense, that
the price at which justice is at last obtained is an evil
outweighing a very considerable amount of injustice; and the
wrong side, even that which the law considers such, has many
chances of gaining its point, through the abandonment of
litigation by the other party for want of funds, or through a
compromise in which a sacrifice is made of just rights to
terminate the suit, or through some technical quirk, whereby a
decision is obtained on some other ground than the merits. This
last detestable incident often happens without blame to the
judge, under a system of law, of which a great part rests on no
rational principles adapted to the present state of society, but
was originally founded partly on a kind of whims and conceits,
and partly on the principles and incidents of feudal tenure,
(which now survive only as legal fictions;) and has only been
very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the changes which
had taken place in society. Of all parts of the English legal
system, the Court of Chancery, which has the best substantive
law, has been incomparably the worst as to delay, vexation, and
expense; and this is the only tribunal for most of the classes of
cases which are in their nature the most complicated, such as
cases of partnership, and the great range and variety of cases
which come under the denomination of trust. The recent reforms in
this Court have abated the mischief, but are still far from
having removed it. 
    Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater part
of the mercantile law is comparatively modern, and was made by
the tribunals, by the simple process of recognizing and giving
force of law to the usages which, from motives of convenience,
had grown up among merchants themselves: so that this part of the
law, at least, was substantially made by those who were most
interested in its goodness: while the defects of the tribunals
have been the less practically pernicious in reference to
commercial transactions, because the importance of credit, which
depends on character, renders the restraints of opinion (though,
as daily experience proves, an insufficient) yet a very powerful,
protection against those forms of mercantile dishonesty which are
generally recognized as such. 
    The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in
its procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with
what is technically called real property; in the general language
of European jurisprudence, immoveable property. With respect to
all this portion of the wealth of the community, the law fails
egregiously in the protection which it undertakes to provide. It
fails, first, by the uncertainty, and the maze of technicalities,
which make it impossible for any one, at however great an
expense, to possess a title to land which he can positively know
to be unassailable. It fails, secondly, in omitting to provide
due evidence of transactions, by a proper registration of legal
documents. It fails, thirdly, by creating a necessity for operose
and expensive instruments and formalities (independently of
fiscal burthens) on occasion of the purchase and sale, or even
the lease or mortgage, of immoveable property. And, fourthly, it
fails by the intolerable expense and delay of law proceedings, in
almost all cases in which real property is concerned. There is no
doubt that the greatest sufferers by the defects of the higher
courts of civil law are the landowners. Legal expenses, either
those of actual litigation, or of the preparation of legal
instruments, form, I apprehend, no inconsiderable item in the
annual expenditure of most persons of large landed property, and
the saleable value of their land is greatly impaired, by the
difficulty of giving to the buyer complete confidence in the
title; independently of the legal expenses which accompany the
transfer. Yet the landowners, though they have been masters of
the legislation of England, to say the least since 1688, have
never made a single move in the direction of law reform, and have
been strenuous opponents of some of the improvements of which
they would more particularly reap the benefit; especially that
great one of a registration of contracts affecting land, which
when proposed by a Commission of eminent real property lawyers,
and introduced into the House of Commons by Lord Campbell, was so
offensive to the general body of landlords, and was rejected by
so large a majority, as to have long discouraged any repetition
of the attempt.(1*) This irrational hostility to improvement, in
a case in which their own interest would be the most benefited by
it, must be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject of
their titles, generated by the defects of the very law which they
refuse to alter; and to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity of
judgment, on all legal subjects, which makes them helplessly
defer to the opinion of their professional advisers, heedless of
the fact that every imperfection of the law, in proportion as it
is burthensome to them, brings gain to the lawyer.
    In so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere
burthen on the landowner, they do not much affect the sources of
production; but the uncertainty of the title under which land is
held, must often act as a great discouragement to the expenditure
of capital in its improvement; and the expense of making
transfers, operates to prevent land from coming into the hands of
those who would use it to most advantage; often amounting, in the
case of small purchases, to more than the price of the land, and
tantamount, therefore, to a prohibition of the purchase and sale
of land in small portions, unless in exceptional circumstances.
Such purchases, however, are almost everywhere extremely
desirable, there being hardly any country in which landed
property is not either too much or too little subdivided,
requiring either that great estates should be broken down, or
that small ones should be bought up and consolidated. To make
land as easily transferable as stock, would be one of the
greatest economical improvements which could be bestowed on a
country; and has been shown, again and again, to have no
insuperable difficulty attending it.
    Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law and
judicature of a country as a system of arrangements for attaining
direct practical ends, much also depends, even in an economical
point of view, upon the moral influences of the law. Enough has
been said in a former place, on the degree in which both the
industrial and all other combined operations of mankind depend
for efficiency on their being able to rely on one another for
probity and fidelity to engagements; from which we see how
greatly even the economical prosperity of a country is liable to
be affected, by anything in its institutions by which either
integrity and trustworthiness, or the contrary qualities, are
encouraged. The law everywhere ostensibly favours at least
pecuniary honesty and the faith of contracts; but if it affords
facilities for evading those obligations, by trick and chicanery,
or by the unscrupulous use of riches in instituting unjust or
resisting just litigation; if there are ways and means by which
persons may attain the ends of roguery, under the apparent
sanction of the law; to that extent the law is demoralizing, even
in regard to pecuniary integrity. And such cases are,
unfortunately, frequent under the English system. If, again, the
law, by a misplaced indulgence, protects idleness or prodigality
against their natural consequences, or dismisses crime with
inadequate penalties, the effect, both on the prudential and on
the social virtues, is unfavourable. When the law, by its own
dispensations and injunctions, establishes injustice between
individual and individual; as all laws do which recognize any
form of slavery; as the laws of all countries do, though not all
in the same degree, in respect to the family relations; and as
the laws of many countries do, though in still more unequal
degrees, as between rich and poor; the effect on the moral
sentiments of the people is still more disastrous. But these
subjects introduce considerations so much larger and deeper than
those of political economy, that I only advert to them in order
not to pass wholly unnoticed, things superior in importance to
those of which I treat. 

NOTES:

1. Lord Westbury's recent Act is a material mitigation of this
grievous defect in English law, and will probably lead to further
improvements. 

