The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 5

Chapter 7

Of a National Debt

    1. The question must now be considered, how far it is right
or expedient to raise money for the purpose of government, not by
laying on taxes to the amount required, but by taking a portion
of the capital of the country in the form of a loan, and charging
the public revenue with only the interest. Nothing needs be said
about providing for temporary wants by taking up money; for
instance, by an issue of exchequer bills, destined to be paid
off, at furthest in a year or two, from the proceeds of the
existing taxes. This is a convenient expedient, and when the
government does not possess a treasure or hoard, is often a
necessary one, on the occurrence of extraordinary expenses, or of
a temporary failure in the ordinary sources of revenue. What we
have to discuss is the propriety of contracting a national debt
of a permanent character; defraying the expenses of a war, or of
any season of difficulty, by loans, to be redeemed either very
gradually and at a distant period, or not at all. 
    This question has already been touched upon in the First
Book. We remarked, that if the capital taken in loans is
abstracted from funds either engaged in production, or destined
to be employed in it, their diversion from that purpose is
equivalent to taking the amount from the wages of the labouring
classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a substitute for raising
the supplies within the year. A government which borrows does
actually take the amount within the year, and that too by a tax
exclusively on the labouring classes: than which it could have
done nothing worse, if it had supplied its wants by avowed
taxation; and in that case the transaction, and its evils, would
have ended with the emergency; while by the circuitous mode
adopted, the value extracted from the labourers is gained, not by
the state, but by the employers of labour, the state remaining
charged with the debt besides, and with its interest in
perpetuity. The system of public loans, in such circumstances,
may be pronounced the very worst which, in the present state of
civilization, is still included in the catalogue of financial
expedients. 
    We however remarked that there are other circumstances in
which loans are not chargeable with these pernicious
consequences: namely, first, when what is borrowed is foreign
capital, the overflowings of the general accumulation of the
world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either would not
have been saved at all unless this mode of investment had been
open to it, or after being saved, would have been wasted in
unproductive enterprises, or sent to seek employment in foreign
countries. When the progress of accumulation has reduced profits
either to the ultimate or to the practical minimum, -- to the
rate, less than which would either put a stop to the increase of
capital, or send the whole of the new accumulations abroad;
government may annually intercept these new accumulations,
without trenching on the employment or wages of the labouring
classes in the country itself, or perhaps in any other country.
To this extent, therefore, the loan system may be carried,
without being liable to the utter and peremptory condemnation
which is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted
is an index to determine whether, in any given series of years,
as during the last great war for example, the limit has been
exceeded or not. 
    Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious one.
Did the government, by its loan operations, augment the rate of
interest? If it only opened a channel for capital which would not
otherwise have been accumulated, or which, if accumulated, would
not have been employed within the country; this implies that the
capital, which the government took and expended, could not have
found employment at the existing rate of interest. So long as the
loans do no more than absorb this surplus, they prevent any
tendency to a fall of the rate of interest, but they cannot
occasion any rise. When they do raise the rate of interest, as
they did in a most extraordinary degree during the French war,
this is positive proof that the government is a competitor for
capital with the ordinary channels, of productive investment, and
is carrying off, not merely funds which would not, but funds
which would, have found productive employment within the country.
To the full extent, therefore, to which the loans of government,
during the war, caused the rate of interest to exceed what it was
before, and what it has been since, those loans are chargeable
with all the evils which have been described. If it be objected
that interest only rose because profits rose, I reply that this
does not weaken, but strengthens, the argument. If the government
loans produced the rise of profits by the great amount of capital
which they absorbed, by what means can they have had this effect,
unless by lowering the wages of labour? It will perhaps be said,
that what kept profits high during the war was not the drafts
made on the national capital by the loans, but the rapid progress
of industrial improvements. This, in a great measure, was the
fact; and it no doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring
classes, and made the financial system which was pursued less.
actively mischievous, but not less contrary to principle. These
very improvements in industry, made room for a larger amount of
capital; and the government, by draining away a great part of the
annual accumulations, did not indeed prevent that capital from
existing ultimately, (for it started into existence with great
rapidity after the peace), but prevented it from existing at the
time, and subtracted just so much, while the war lasted, from
distribution among productive labourers. If the government had
abstained from taking this capital by loan, and had allowed it to
reach the labourers, but had raised the supplies which it
required by a direct tax on the labouring classes, it would have
produced (in every respect but the expense and inconvenience of
collecting the tax) the very same economical effects which it did
produce, except that we should not now have had the debt. The
course it actually took was therefore worse than the very worst
mode which it could possibly have adopted of raising the supplies
within the year: and the only excuse, or justification, which it
admits of, (so far as that excuse could be truly pleaded), was
hard necessity; the impossibility of raising so enormous an
annual sum by taxation, without resorting to taxes which from
their odiousness, or from the facility of evasion, it would have
been found impracticable to enforce.
    When government loans are limited to the overflowings of the
national capital, or to those accumulations which would not take
place at all unless suffered to overflow, they are at least not
liable to this grave condemnation: they occasion no privation to
any one at the time, except by the payment of the interest, and
may even be beneficial to the labouring class during the term of
their expenditure, by employing in the direct purchase of labour,
as that of soldiers, sailors, &c., funds which might otherwise
have quitted the country altogether. In this case therefore the
question really is, what it is commonly supposed to be in all
cases, namely, a choice between a great sacrifice at once, and a
small one indefinitely prolonged. On this matter it seems
rational to think, that the prudence of a nation will dictate the
same conduct as the prudence of an individual; to submit to as
much of the privation immediately, as can easily be borne, and
only when any further burthen would distress or cripple them too
much, to provide for the remainder by mortgaging their future
income. It is an excellent maxim to make present resources
suffice for present wants; the future will have its own wants to
provide for. On the other hand, it may reasonably be taken into
consideration that in a country increasing in wealth, the
necessary expenses of government do not increase in the same
ratio as capital or population; any burthen, therefore, is always
less and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses of
government which are fit to be incurred at all, are most
beneficial beyond the existing generation, there is no injustice
in making posterity pay a part of the price, if the inconvenience
would be extreme of defraying the whole of it by the exertions
and sacrifices of the generation which first incurred it. 

    2. When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burthened itself
with a debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming that
debt? In principle it is impossible not to maintain the
affirmative. It is true that the payment of the interest, when
the creditors are members of the same community, is no national
loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer, however, being
compulsory, is a serious evil, and the raising a great extra
revenue by any system of taxation necessitates so much expense,
vexation, disturbance of the channels of industry, and other
mischiefs over and above the mere payment of the money wanted by
the government, that to get rid of the necessity of such taxation
is at all times worth a considerable effort. The same amount of
sacrifice which would have been worth incurring to avoid
contracting the debt, it is worth while to incur, at any
subsequent time, for the purpose of extinguishing it. 
    Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national
debt: either at once by a general contribution, or gradually by a
surplus revenue. The first would be incomparably the best, if it
were practicable; and it would be practicable if it could justly
be done by assessment on property alone. If property bore the
whole interest of the debt, property might, with great advantage
to itself, pay it off; since this would be merely surrendering to
a creditor the principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of which
were already his by law; and would be equivalent to what a
landowner does when he sells part of his estate, to free the
remainder from a mortgage. But property, it needs hardly be said,
does not pay, and cannot just be required to pay, the whole
interest of the debt. Some indeed affirm that it can, on the plea
that the existing generation is only bound to pay the debts of
its predecessors from the assets it has received from them, and
not from the produce of its own industry. But has no one received
anything from previous generations except those who have
succeeded to property? Is the whole difference between the earth
as it is, with its clearings and improvements, its roads and
canals, its towns and manufactories, and the earth as it was when
the first human being set foot on it, of no benefit to any but
those who are called the owners of the soil? Is the capital
accumulated by the labour and abstinence of all former
generations, of no advantage to any but those who have succeeded
to the legal ownership of part of it? And have we not inherited a
mass of acquired know. ledge, both scientific and empirical, due
to the sagacity and industry of those who preceded us, the
benefits of which are the common wealth of all? Those who are
born to the ownership of property have, in addition to these
common benefits, a separate inheritance, and to this difference
it is right that advertence should be had in regulating taxation.
It belongs to the general financial system of the country to take
due account of this principle, and I have indicated, as in my
opinion a proper mode of taking account of it, a considerable tax
on legacies and inheritances. Let it be determined directly and
openly what is due from property to the state, and from the state
to property, and let the institutions of the state be regulated
accordingly. Whatever is the fitting contribution from property
to the general expenses of the state, in the same and in no
greater proportion should it contribute towards either the
interest or the repayment of the national debt. 
    This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the
extinction of the debt by a general assessment on the community.
Persons of property could pay their share of the amount by a
sacrifice of property, and have the same net income as before;
but if those who have no accumulations, but only incomes, were
required to make up by a single payment the equivalent of the
annual charge laid on them by the taxes maintained to pay the
interest of the debt, they could only do so by incurring a
private debt equal to their share of the public debt; while, from
the in. sufficiency, in most cases, of the security which they
could give, the interest would amount to a much larger annual sum
than their share of that now paid by the state. Besides, a
collective debt defrayed by taxes, has over the same debt
parcelled out among individuals, the immense advantage, that it
is virtually a mutual insurance among the contributors. If the
fortune of a contributor diminishes, his taxes diminish; if he is
ruined, they cease altogether, and his portion of the debt is
wholly transferred to the solvent members of the community. If it
were laid on him as a private obligation, he would still be
liable to it even when penniless. 
    When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise,
which there are not strong reasons of public utility for its
retaining at its disposal, this should be employed, as far as it
will go, in extinguishing debt. Any casual gain, or godsend, is
naturally devoted to the same purpose. Beyond this, the only mode
which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing or reducing a
national debt, is by means of a surplus revenue. 

    3. The desirableness, per se, of maintaining a surplus for
this purpose, does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We sometimes,
indeed, hear it said that the amount should rather be left to
'fructify in the pockets of the people'. This is a good argument,
as far as it goes, against levying taxes unnecessarily for
purposes of unproductive expenditure, but not against paying off
a national debt. For, what is meant by the word fructify? If it
means anything, it means productive employment; and as an
argument against taxation, we must understand it to assert, that
if the amount were left with the people they would save it, and
convert it into capital. It is probable, indeed, that they would
save a part, but extremely improbable that they would save the
whole: while if taken by taxation, and employed in paying off
debt, the whole is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder
who receives the payment it is already capital, not revenue, and
he will make it 'fructify', that it may continue to afford him an
income. The objection, therefore, is not only groundless, but the
real argument is on the other side: the amount is much more
certain of fructifying if it is not 'left in the pockets of the
people.'
    It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a
surplus revenue for the extinction of debt. The advantage of
paying off the national debt of Great Britain, for instance, is
that it would enable us to get rid of the worse half of our
taxation. But of this worse half some portions must be worse than
others, and to get rid of those would be a greater benefit
proportionally than to get rid of the rest. If renouncing a
surplus revenue would enable us to dispense with a tax, we ought
to consider the very worst of all our taxes as precisely the one
which we are keeping up for the sake of ultimately abolishing
taxes not so bad as itself. In a country advancing in wealth,
whose increasing revenue gives it the power of ridding itself
from time to time of the most inconvenient portions of its
taxation, I conceive that the increase of revenue should rather
be disposed of by taking off taxes, than by liquidating debt, as
long as any very objectionable imposts remain. In the present
state of England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in the
government, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent
character, to take off taxes, provided these are rightly
selected. Even when no taxes remain but such as are not unfit to
form part of a permanent system, it is wise to continue the same
policy by experimental reductions of those taxes, until the point
is discovered at which a given amount of revenue can be raised
with the smallest pressure on the contributors. After this, such
surplus revenue as might arise from any further increase of the
produce of the taxes, should not, I conceive, be remitted, but
applied to the redemption of debt. Eventually, it might be
expedient to appropriate the entire produce of particular taxes
to this purpose; since there would be more assurance that the
liquidation would be persisted in, if the fund destined to it the
were kept apart, and not blended with the general revenues of
state. The succession duties would be peculiarly suited to such a
purpose, since taxes paid as they are, out of capital, would such
a be better employed in reimbursing capital than in defraying
current expenditure. If this separate appropriation were made,
any surplus afterwards arising from the increasing produce of the
other taxes, and from the saving of interest on the successive
portions of debt paid off, might form a ground for a remission of
taxation.
    It has been contended that some amount of national debt is
desirable, and almost indispensable, as an investment for the
savings of the poorer or more inexperienced part of the
community. Its convenience in that respect is undeniable; but
(besides that the progress of industry is gradually affording
other modes of investment almost as safe and untroublesome, such
as the obligations of great public companies) the only real
superiority of an investment in the funds consists in the
national guarantee, and this could be afforded by other means
than that of a public debt, involving compulsory taxation. One
mode which would answer the purpose, would be a national bank of
deposit and discount, with ramifications throughout the country;
which might receive any money confided to it, and either fund it
at a fixed rate of interest, or allow interest on a floating
balance, like the joint-stock banks; the interest given being of
course lower than the rate at which individuals can borrow, in
proportion and to the greater security of a government
investment; the expenses of the establishment being defrayed by
the difference between the interest which the bank would pay, and
that which it would obtain, by lending its deposits on
mercantile, landed, or other security. There are no insuperable
objections in principle, nor, I should think, in practice, to an
institution of this sort, as a means of supplying the same
convenient mode of investment now afforded by the public funds.
It would constitute the state a great insurance company, to
insure that part of the community who live on the interest of
their property, against the risk of losing it by the bankruptcy
of those to whom they might otherwise be under the necessity of
confiding it. 

