


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 5



Chapter 10



Of Interferences of Government Grounded on Erroneous Theories



    1. From the necessary functions of government, and the

effects produced on the economical interests of society by their

good or ill discharge, we proceed to the functions which belong

to what I have termed, for want of a better designation, the

optional class; those which are sometimes assumed by governments

and sometimes not, and which it is not unanimously admitted that

they ought to exercise. 

    Before entering on the general principles of the question, it

will be advisable to clear from our path all those cases, in

which government interference works ill because grounded on false

views of the subject interfered with. Such cases have no

connexion with any theory respecting the proper limits of

interference. There are some things with which governments ought

not to meddle, and other things with which they ought; but

whether right or wrong in itself, the interference must work for

ill, if government, not understanding the subject which it

meddles with, meddles to bring about a result which would be

mischievous. We will therefore begin by passing in review various

false theories, which have from time to time formed the ground of

acts of government more or less economically injurious. 

    Former writers on political economy have found it needful to

devote much trouble and space to this department of their

subject. It has now happily become possible, at least in our own

country, greatly to abridge this purely negative part of our

discussions. The false theories of political economy which have

done so much mischief in times past, are entirely discredited

among all who have not lagged behind the general progress of

opinion; and few of the enactments which were once grounded on

those theories still help to deform the statute-book. As the

principles on which their condemnation rests have been fully set

forth in other parts of this Treatise, we may here content

ourselves with a few brief indications. 

    Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of

Protection to Native Industry; a phrase meaning the prohibition,

or the discouragement by heavy duties, of such foreign

commodities as are capable of being produced at home. If the

theory involved in this system had been correct, the practical

conclusions grounded on it would not have been unreasonable. The

theory was, that to buy things produced at home was a national

benefit, and the introduction of foreign commodities generally a

national loss. It being at the same time evident that the

interest of the consumer is to buy foreign commodities in

preference to domestic whenever they are either cheaper or

better, the interest of the consumer appeared in this respect to

be contrary to the public interest; he was certain, if left to

his own inclinations, to do what according to the theory was

injurious to the public. 

    It was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of

inter. national trade, as it had been often shown by former

writers, that the importation of foreign commodities, in the

common course of traffic, never takes place, except when it is,

economically speaking, a national good, by causing the same

amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of labour

and capital to the country. To prohibit, therefore, this

importation, or impose duties which prevent it, is to render the

labour and capital of the country less efficient in production

than they would otherwise be; and compel a waste, of the

difference between the labour and capital necessary for the home

production of the commodity, and that which is required for

producing the things with which it can be purchased from abroad.

The amount of national loss thus occasioned is measured by the

excess of the price at which the commodity is produced, over that

at which it could be imported. In the case of manufactured goods,

the whole difference between the two prices is absorbed in

indemnifying the producers for waste of labour, or of the capital

which supports that labour. Those who are supposed to be

benefited, namely, the makers of the protected articles, (unless

they form an exclusive company, and have a monopoly against their

own countrymen as well as against foreigners,) do not obtain

higher profits than other people. All is sheer loss, to the

country as well as to the consumer. When the protected article is

a product of agriculture -- the waste of labour not being

incurred on the whole produce, but only on what may be called the

last instalment of it -- the extra price is only in part an

indemnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid to the

landlords. 

    The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally

grounded on what is called the Mercantile System, which

representing the advantage of foreign trade to consist solely in

bringing money into the country, gave artificial encouragement to

exportation of goods, and discountenanced their importation. The

only exceptions to the system were those required by the system

itself. The materials and instruments of production were the

subjects of a contrary policy, directed however to the same end;

they were freely imported, and not permitted to be exported, in

order that manufacturers, being more cheaply supplied with the

requisites of manufacture, might be able to sell cheaper, and

therefore to export more largely. For a similar reason,

importation was allowed and even favoured, when confined to the

productions of countries, which were supposed to take from the

country still more than it took from them, thus enriching it by a

favourable balance of trade. As part of the same system, colonies

were founded, for the supposed advantage of compelling them to

buy our commodities, or at all events not to buy those of any

other country: in return for which restriction, we were generally

willing to come under an equivalent obligation with respect to

the staple productions of the colonists. The consequences of the

theory were pushed so far, that it was not unusual even to give

bounties on exportation, and induce foreigners to buy from us

rather than from other countries, by a cheapness which we

artificially produced, by paying part of the price for them out

of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the point yet reached

by any private tradesman in his competition for business. No

shopkeeper, I should think, ever made a practice of bribing

customers by selling goods to them at a permanent loss, making it

up to himself from other funds in his possession.

   The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up even by

writers and governments who still cling to the restrictive

system. Whatever hold that system has over men's minds,

independently of the private interests exposed to real or

apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived from fallacies

other than the old notion of the benefits of heaping up money in

the country. The most effective of these is the specious plea of

employing our own countrymen and our national industry, instead

of feeding and supporting the industry of foreigners. The answer

to this, from the principles laid down in former chapters, is

evident. Without reverting to the fundamental theorem discussed

in an early part of the present treatise, respecting the nature

and sources of employment for labour, it is sufficient to say,

what has usually been said by the advocates of free trade, that

the alternative is not between employing our own people and

foreigners, but between employing one class and another of our

own people. The imported commodity is always paid for, directly

or indirectly, with the produce of our own industry: that

industry being at the same time rendered more productive, since,

with the same labour and outlay, we are enabled to possess

ourselves of a greater quantity of the article. Those who have

not well considered the subject are apt to suppose that our

exporting an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign

articles we consume, depends on contingencies -- on the consent

of foreign countries to make some corresponding relaxation of

their own restrictions, or on the question whether those from

whom we buy are induced by that circumstance to buy more from us;

and that, if these things, or things equivalent to them, do not

happen, the payment must be made in money. Now, in the first

place, there is nothing more objectionable in a money payment

than in payment by any other medium, if the state of the market

makes it the most advantageous remittance; and the money itself

was first acquired, and would again be replenished, by the export

of an equivalent value of our own products. But, in the next

place, a very short interval of paying in money would so lower

prices as either to stop a part of the importation, or raise up a

foreign demand for our produce, sufficient to pay for the

imports. I grant that this disturbance of the equation of

international demand would be in some degree to our disadvantage,

in the purchase of other imported articles; and that a country

which prohibits some foreign commodities, does, caeteris paribus,

obtain those which it does not prohibit, at a less price than it

would otherwise have to pay. To express the same thing in other

words; a country which destroys or prevents altogether certain

branches of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a general gain to

the world, which would be shared in some proportion between

itself and other countries -- does, in some circumstances, draw

to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger share than

would else belong to it of the gain arising from that portion of

its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist. But even this it

can only be enabled to do, if foreigners do not maintain

equivalent prohibitions or restrictions against its commodities.

In any case, the justice or expediency of destroying one of two

gains, in order to engross a rather larger share of the other,

does not require much discussion: the gain, too, which is

destroyed, being, in proportion to the magnitude of the

transactions, the larger of the two, since it is the one which

capital, left to itself, is supposed to seek by preference. 

    Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine

finds support in particular cases, from considerations which,

when really in point, involve greater interests than mere saving

of labour; the interests of national subsistence and of national

defence. The discussions on the Corn Laws have familiarized

everybody with the plea, that we ought to be independent of

foreigners for the food of the people; and the Navigation Laws

were grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of

keeping up a 'nursery of seamen' for the navy. On this last

subject I at once admit, that the object is worth the sacrifice;

and that a country exposed to invasion by sea, if it cannot

otherwise have sufficient ships and sailors of its own to secure

the means of manning on an emergency an adequate fleet, is quite

right in obtaining those means, even at an economical sacrifice

in point of cheapness of transport. When the English Navigation

Laws were enacted, the Dutch, from their maritime skill and their

low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other nations,

England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could carry

for themselves: which placed all other countries at a great

comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for

their ships of war. The Navigation Laws, by which this deficiency

was remedied, and at the same time a blow struck against the

maritime power of a nation with which England was then frequently

engaged in hostilities, were probably, though economically

disadvantageous, politically expedient. But English ships and

sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of any other

country; maintaining at least an equal competition with the other

maritime nations even in their own trade. The ends which may once

have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and

afforded no reason for maintaining this invidious exception to

the general rule of free trade. 

    With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists

has been so often and so triumphantly met, that it requires

little notice here. That country is the most steadily as well as

the most abundantly supplied with food, which draws its supplies

from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a general

system of policy on so improbable a danger as that of being at

war with all the nations of the world at once; or to suppose

that, even if inferior at sea, a whole country could be blockaded

like a town, or that the growers of food in other countries would

not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous market, as we

should be not to be deprived of their corn. On the subject,

however, of subsistence, there is one point which deserves more

especial consideration. In cases of actual or apprehended

scarcity, many countries of Europe are accustomed to stop the

exportation of food. Is this, or not, sound policy? There can be

no doubt that in the present state of international morality, a

people cannot, any more than an individual, be blamed for not

starving itself to feed others. But if the greatest amount of

good to mankind on the whole, were the end aimed at in the maxims

of international conduct, such collective churlishness would

certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in ordinary

circumstances the trade in food were perfectly free, so that the

price in one country could not habitually exceed that in any

other by more than the cost of carriage, together with a moderate

profit to the importer. A general scarcity ensues, affecting all

countries, but in unequal degrees. If the price rose in one

country more than in others, it would be a proof that in that

country the scarcity was severest, and that by permitting food to

go freely thither from any other country, it would be spared from

a less urgent necessity to relieve a greater. When the interests,

therefore, of all countries are considered, free exportation is

desirable. To the sporting country considered separately, it may,

at least on the particular occasion, be an inconvenience: but

taking into account that the country which is now the giver, will

in some future season be the receiver, and the one that is

benefited by the freedom, I cannot but think that even to the

apprehension of food rioters it might be made apparent, that in

such cases they should do to others what they would wish done to

themselves. 

    In countries in which the Protection theory is declining, but

not yet given up, such as the United States, a doctrine has come

into notice which is a sort of compromise between free trade and

restriction, namely, that protection for protection's sake is

improper, but that there is nothing objectionable in having as

much protection as may incidentally result from a tariff framed

solely for revenue. Even in England, regret is sometimes

expressed that a 'moderate fixed duty' was not preserved on corn,

on account of the revenue it would yield. Independently, however,

of the general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this

doctrine overlooks the fact, that revenue is received only on the

quantity imported, but that the tax is paid on the entire

quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the treasury

may receive a little, is not an eligible mode of obtaining a

revenue. In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine

involves a palpable inconsistency. The object of the duty as a

means of revenue, is inconsistent with its affording, even

incidentally, any protection. It can only operate as protection

in so far as it prevents importation; and to whatever degree it

prevents importation, it affords no revenue. 

    The only case in which, on mere principles of political

economy, protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are

imposed temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in

hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself perfectly

suitable to the circumstances of the country. The superiority of

one country over another in a branch of production, often arises

only from having begun it sooner. There may be no inherent

advantage on one part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a

present superiority of acquired skill and experience. A country

which has this skill and experience yet to acquire, may in other

respects be better adapted to the production than those which

were earlier in the field: and besides, it is a just remark of Mr

Rae, that nothing has a greater tendency to promote improvements

in any branch of production, than its trial under a new set of

conditions. But it cannot be expected that individuals should, at

their own risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new

manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it on until the

producers have been educated up to the level of those with whom

the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a

reasonable time, might sometimes be the least inconvenient mode

in which the nation can tax itself for the support of such an

experiment. But it is essential that the protection should be

confined to cases in which there is good ground of assurance that

the industry which it fosters will after a time be able to

dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers ever be

allowed to expect that it will be continued to them beyond the

time necessary for a fair trial of what they are capable of

accomplishing. 

    The only writer, of any reputation as a political economist,

who now adheres to the Protectionist doctrine, Mr H.C. Carey,

rests its defence, in an economic point of view, principally on

two reasons. One is, the great saving in cost of carriage,

consequent on producing commodities at or very near to the place

where they are to be consumed. The whole of the cost of carriage,

both on the commodities imported and on those exported in

exchange for them, he regards as a direct burthen on the

producers, and not, as is obviously the truth, on the consumers.

On whomsoever it falls, it is, without doubt, a burthen on the

industry of the world. But it is obvious (and that Mr Carey does

not see it, is one of the many surprising things in his book)

that the burthen is only borne for a more than equivalent

advantage. If the commodity is bought in a foreign country with

domestic produce in spite of the double cost of carriage, the

fact proves that, heavy as that cost may be, the saving in cost

of production outweighs it, and the collective labour of the

country is on the whole better remunerated than if the article

were produced at home. Cost of carriage is a natural protecting

duty, which free trade has no power to abrogate: and unless

America gained more by obtaining her manufactures through the

medium of her corn and cotton than she loses in cost of carriage,

the capital employed in producing corn and cotton in annually

increased quantities for the foreign market, would turn to

manufactures instead. The natural advantages attending a mode of

industry in which there is less cost of carriage to pay, can at

most be only a justification for a temporary and merely tentative

protection. The expenses of production being always greatest at

first, it may happen that the home production, though really the

most advantageous, may not become so until after a certain

duration of pecuniary loss, which it is not to be expected that

private speculators should incur in order that their successors

may be benefited by their ruin. I have therefore conceded that in

a new country a temporary protecting duty may sometimes be

economically defensible; on condition, however, that it be

strictly limited in point of time, and provision be made that

during the latter part of its existence it be on a gradually

decreasing scale. Such temporary protection is of the same nature

as a patent, and should be governed by similar conditions. 

    The remaining argument of Mr Carey in support of the economic

benefits of Protectionism, applies only to countries whose

exports consist of agricultural produce. He argues, that by a

trade of this description they actually send away their soil: the

distant consumers not giving back to the land of the country, as

home consumers would do, the fertilizing elements which they

abstract from it. This argument deserves attention on account of

the physical truth on which it is founded; a truth which has only

lately come to be understood, but which is henceforth destined to

be a permanent element in the thoughts of statesmen, as it must

always have been in the destinies of nations. To the question of

Protectionism, however, it is irrelevant. That the immense growth

of raw produce in America to be consumed in Europe, is

progresssively exhausting the soil of the Eastern, and even of

the older Western States, and that both are already far less

productive than formerly, is credible in itself, even if no one

bore witness to it. But what I have already said respecting cost

of carriage, is true also of the cost of manuring. Free trade

does not compel America to export corn: she would cease to do so

if it ceased to be to her advantage. As, then, she would not

persist in exporting raw produce and importing manufactures, any

longer than the labour she saved by doing so exceeded what the

carriage cost her, so when it became necessary for her to replace

in the soil the elements of fertility which she had sent away, if

the saving in cost of production were more than equivalent to the

cost of carriage and of manure together, manure would be

imported; and if not, the export of corn would cease. It is

evident that one of these two things would already have taken

place, if there had not been near at hand a constant succession

of new soils, not yet exhausted of their fertility, the

cultivation of which enables her, whether judiciously or not, to

postpone the question of manure. As soon as it no longer answers

better to break up new soils than to manure the old, America will

either become a regular importer of manure, or will, without

protecting duties, grow corn for herself only, and manufacturing

for herself, will make her manure, as Mr Carey desires, at

home.(1*)

    For these obvious reasons, I hold Mr Carey's economic

arguments for Protectionism to be totally invalid. The economic,

however, is far from being the strongest point of his case.

American Protectionists often reason extremely ill; but it is an

injustice to them to suppose that their Protectionist creed rests

upon nothing superior to an economic blunder. Many of them have

been led to it, much more by consideration for the higher

interests of humanity, than by purely economic reasons. They, and

Mr Carey at their head, deem it a necessary condition of human

improvement that towns should abound; that men should combine

their labour, by means of interchange -- with near neighbours,

with people of pursuits, capacities, and mental cultivation

different from their own, sufficiently close at hand for mutual

sharpening of wits and enlarging of ideas -- rather than with

people on the opposite side of the globe. They believe that a

nation all engaged in the same, or nearly the same, pursuit -- a

nation all agricultural -- cannot attain a high state of

civilization and culture. And for this there is a great

foundation of reason. If the difficulty can be overcome, the

United States, with their free institutions, the universal

schooling and their omnipresent press, are the people to do it;

but whether this is possible or not is still a problem. So far,

however, as it is an object to check the excessive dispersion of

the population, Mr Wakefield has pointed out a better way; to

modify the existing method of disposing of the unoccupied lands,

by raising the price, instead of lowering it, or giving away the

land gratuitously, as is largely done since the passing of the

Homestead Act. To cut the knot in Mr Carey's fashion, by

Protectionism, it would be necessary that Ohio and Michigan

should be protected against Massachusetts as well as against

England: for the manufactories of New England, no more than those

of the old country, accomplish his desideratum of bringing a

manufacturing population to the doors of the Western farmer.

Boston and New York do not supply the want of local towns to the

Western prairies, any better than Manchester; and it is as

difficult to get back the manure from the one place as from the

other.

    There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which

requires any further notice: its policy towards colonies, and

foreign dependencies; that of compelling them to trade

exclusively with the dominant country. A country which thus

secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its commodities,

undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution of

the general gains of the commercial world, Since, however, it

causes the industry and capital of the colony to be diverted from

channels, which are proved to be the most productive, inasmuch as

they are those into which industry and capital spontaneously tend

to flow; there is a loss, on the whole, to the productive powers

of the world, and the mother country does not gain so much as she

makes the colony lose. If, therefore, the mother country refuses

to acknowledge any reciprocity of obligation, she imposes a

tribute on the colony in an indirect mode, greatly more

oppressive and injurious that the direct. But if, with a more

equitable spirit, she submits herself to corresponding

restrictions for the benefit of the colony, the result of the

whole transaction is the ridiculous one, that each party loses

much, in order that the other may gain a little. 



    2. Next to the system of Protection, among mischievous

interferences with the spontaneous course of industrial

transactions, may be noticed certain interferences with

contracts. One instance is that of the Usury Laws. These

originated in a religious prejudice against receiving interest on

money, derived from that fruitful source of mischief in modern

Europe, the attempted adaptation to Christianity of doctrines and

precepts drawn from the Jewish law. In Mahomedan nations the

receiving of interest is formally interdicted, and rigidly

abstained from: and Sismondi has noticed, as one among the causes

of the industrial inferiority of the Catholic, compared with the

Protestant parts of Europe, that the Catholic Church in the

middle ages gave its sanction to the same prejudice; which

subsists, impaired but not destroyed, wherever that religion is

acknowledged. Where law or conscientious scruples prevent lending

at interest, the capital which belongs to persons not in business

is lost to productive purposes, or can be applied to them only in

peculiar circumstances of personal connexion, or by a subterfuge.

Industry is thus limited to the capital of the undertakers, and

to what they can borrow from persons not bound by the same laws

or religion as themselves. In Mussulman countries the bankers and

money dealers are either Hindoos, Armenians, or Jews. 

    In more improved countries, legislation no longer

discountenances the receipt of an equivalent for money lent; but

it has everywhere interfered with the free agency of the lender

and borrower, by fixing a legal limit to the rate of interest,

and making the receipt of more than the appointed maximum a penal

offence. This restriction, though approved by Adam Smith, has

been condemned by all enlightened persons since the triumphant

onslaught made upon it by Bentham in his 'Letters on Usury',

which may still be referred to as the best extant writing on the

subject. 

    Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from one of two

motives: ideas of public policy, or concern for the interest of

the parties in the contract; in this case, of one party only, the

borrower. As a matter of policy, the notion may possibly be, that

it is for the general good that interest should be low. It is

however a misapprehension of the causes which influence

commercial transactions, to suppose that the rate of interest is

really made lower by law, than it would be made by the

spontaneous play of supply and demand. If the competition of

borrowers, left unrestrained, would raise the rate of interest to

six per cent, this proves that at five there would be a greater

demand for loans, than there is capital in the market to supply.

If the law in these circumstances permits no interest beyond five

per cent, there will be some lenders, who not choosing to disobey

the law, and not being in a condition to employ their capital

otherwise, will content themselves with the legal rate: but

others, finding that in a season of pressing demand, more may be

made of their capital by other means than they are permitted to

make by lending it, will not lend it at all; and the loanable

capital, already too small for the demand, will be still further

diminished. Of the disappointed candidates there will be many at

such periods, who must have their necessities supplied at any

price, and these will readily find a third section of lenders,

who will not be averse to join in a violation of the law, either

by circuitous transactions partaking of the nature of fraud, or

by relying on the honour of the borrower. The extra expense of

the roundabout mode of proceeding, and an equivalent for the risk

of non-payment and of legal penalties, must be paid by the

borrower, over and above the extra interest which would have been

required of him by the general state of the market. The laws

which were intended to lower the price paid by him for pecuniary

accommodation, end thus in greatly increasing it. These laws have

also a directly demoralizing tendency. Knowing the difficulty of

detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between two persons,

in which no third person is involved, so long as it is the

interest of both to keep the secret, legislators have adopted the

expedient of tempting the borrower to become the informer, by

making the annulment of the debt a part of the penalty for the

offence; thus rewarding men for first obtaining the property of

others by false promises, and then not only refusing payment, but

invoking legal penalties on those who have helped them in their

need. The moral sense of mankind very rightly infamizes those who

resist an otherwise just claim on the ground of usury, and

tolerates such a plea only when resorted to as the best legal

defence available against an attempt really considered as

partaking of fraud or extortion. But this very severity of public

opinion renders the enforcement of the laws so difficult, and the

infliction of the penalties so rare, that when it does occur it

merely victimizes an individual, and has no effect on general

practice. 

    In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed to

be, not public policy, but regard for the interest of the

borrower, it would be difficult to point out any case in which

such tenderness on the legislator's part is more misplaced. A

person of sane mind, and of the age at which persons are legally

competent to conduct their own concerns, must be presumed to be a

sufficient guardian of his pecuniary interests. If he may sell an

estate, or grant a release, or assign away all his property,

without control from the law, it seems very unnecessary that the

only bargain which he cannot make without its intermeddling,

should be a loan of money. The law seems to presume that the

money-lender, dealing with necessitous persons, can take

advantage of their necessities, and exact conditions limited only

by his own pleasure. It might be so if there were only one

money-lender within reach. But when there is the whole monied

capital of a wealthy community to resort to, no borrower is

placed under any disadvantage in the market merely by the urgency

of his need. If he cannot borrow at the interest paid by other

people, it must be because he cannot give such good security: and

competition will limit the extra demand to a fair equivalent for

the risk of his proving insolvent. Though the law intends favour

to the borrower, it is to him above all that injustice is, in

this case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a person

who cannot give perfectly good security, should be prevented from

borrowing of persons who are willing to lend money to him, by

their not being permitted to receive the rate of interest which

would be a just equivalent for their risk? Through the mistaken

kindness of the law, he must either go without the money which is

perhaps necessary to save him from much greater losses, or be

driven to expedients of a far more ruinous description, which the

law either has not found it possible, or has not happened, to

interdict. 

    Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that only

two kinds of persons, 'prodigals and projectors', could require

to borrow money at more than the market rate of interest. He

should have included all persons who are in any pecuniary

difficulties, however temporary their necessities may be. It may

happen to any person in business, to be disappointed of the

resources on which he had calculated for meeting some engagement,

the non-fulfilment of which on a fixed day would be bankruptcy.

In periods of commercial difficulty, this is the condition of

many prosperous mercantile firms, who become competitors for the

small amount of disposable capital which, in a time of general

distrust, the owners are willing to part with. Under the English

usury laws, now happily abolished, the limitations imposed by

those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every

commercial crisis. Merchants who could have obtained the aid they

required at an interest of seven or eight per cent for short

periods, were obliged to give 20 or 30 per cent, or to resort to

forced sales of goods at a still greater loss. Experience having

obtruded these evils on the notice of Parliament, the sort of

compromise took place, of which English legislation affords so

many instances, and which helps to make our laws and policy the

mass of inconsistency that they are. The law was reformed as a

person reforms a tight shoe, who cuts a hole in it where it

pinches hardest, and continues to wear it. Retaining the

erroneous principle as a general rule, Parliament allowed an

exception in the case in which the practical mischief was most

flagrant. It left the usury laws unrepealed, but exempted bills

of exchange, of not more than three months date, from their

operation. Some years afterwards the laws were repealed in regard

to all other contracts, but left in force as to all those which

relate to land. Not a particle of reason could be given for

making this extraordinary distinction: but the 'agricultural

mind' was of opinion that the interest on mortgages, though it

hardly ever came up to the permitted point, would came up to a

still higher point; and the usury laws were maintained that the

landlords might as they thought, be enabled to borrow below the

market rate, as the corn-laws were kept up that the same class

might be able to sell corn above the market rate. The modesty of

the pretension was quite worthy of the intelligence which could

think that the end aimed at was in any way forwarded by the means

used. 

    With regard to the 'prodigals and projectors' spoken of by

Adam Smith; no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining himself,

unless it lays him or his property under actual restraint,

according to the unjustifiable practice of the Roman Law and some

of the Continental systems founded on it. The only effect of

usury laws upon a prodigal, is to make his ruin rather more

expeditious, by driving him to a disreputable class of

money-dealers, and rendering the conditions more onerous by the

extra risk created by the law. As for projectors, (a term, in its

unfavourable sense, rather unfairly applied to every person who

has a project); such laws may put a veto upon the prosecution of

the most promising enterprise, when planned, as it generally is,

by a person who does not possess capital adequate to its

successful completion. Many of the greatest improvements were at

first looked shyly on by capitalists, and had to wait long before

they found one sufficiently adventurous to be the first in a new

path: many years elapsed before Stephenson could convince even

the enterprising mercantile public of Liverpool and Manchester,

of the advantage of substituting railways for turnpike roads; and

plans on which great labour and large sums have been expended

with little visible result (the epoch in their progress when

predictions of failure are most rife) may be indefinitely

suspended, or altogether dropped, and the outlay all lost, if,

when the original funds are exhausted, the law will not allow

more to be raised on the terms on which people are willing to

expose it to the chances of an enterprise not yet secure of

success. 



    3. Loans are not the only kind of contract, of which

governments have thought themselves qualified to regulate the

conditions better than the persons interested. There is scarcely

any commodity which they have not, at some place or time,

endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than it would be if

left to itself. The most plausible case for artificially

cheapening a commodity, is that of food. The desirableness of the

object is in this case undeniable. But since the average price of

food, like that of other things, conforms to the cost of

production, with the addition of the usual profit; if this price

is not expected by the farmer, he will, unless compelled by law,

produce no more than he requires for his own consumption: and the

law, therefore, if absolutely determined to have food cheaper,

must substitute, for the ordinary motives to cultivation, a

system of penalties. If it shrinks from doing this, it has no

resource but that of taxing the whole nation, to give a bounty or

premium to the grower or importer of corn, thus giving everybody

cheap bread at the expense of all: in reality a largess to those

who do not pay taxes, at the expense of those who do; one of the

forms of a practice essentially bad, that of converting the

working classes into unworking classes by making them a present

of subsistence. 

    It is not however so much the general or average price of

food, as its occasional high price in times of emergency, which

governments have studied to reduce. In some cases, as for example

the famous 'maximum' of the revolutionary government of 1793, the

compulsory regulation was an attempt by the ruling powers to

counteract the necessary consequences of their own acts; to

scatter an indefinite abundance of the circulating medium with

one hand, and keep down prices with the other; a thing manifestly

impossible under any regime except one of unmitigated terror. In

case of actual scarcity, governments are often urged, as they

were in the Irish emergency of 1847, to take measures of some

sort for moderating the price of food. But the price of a thing

cannot be raised by deficiency of supply, beyond what is

sufficient to make a corresponding reduction of the consumption;

and if a government prevents this reduction from being brought

about by a rise of price, there remains no mode of effecting it

unless by taking possession of all the food, and serving it out

in rations, as in a besieged town. In a real scarcity, nothing

can afford general relief, except a determination by the richer

classes to diminish their own consumption. If they buy and

consume their usual quantity of food, and content themselves with

giving money, they do no good. The price is forced up until the

poorest competitors have no longer the means of competing, and

the privation of food is thrown exclusively upon the indigent,

the other classes being only affected pecuniarily. When the

supply is insufficient, somebody must consume less, and if every

rich person is determined not to be that somebody, all they do by

subsidizing their poor competitors is to force up the price so

much the higher, with no effect but to enrich the corn.dealers,

the very reverse of what is desired by those who recommend such

measures. All that governments can do in these emergencies, is to

counsel a general moderation in consumption, and to interdict

such kinds of it as are not of primary importance. Direct

measures at the cost of the state, to procure food from a

distance, are expedient when from peculiar reasons the thing is

not likely to be done by private speculation. In any other case

they are a great error. Private speculators, will not, in such

cases, venture to compete with the government; and though a

government can do more than any one merchant, it cannot do nearly

so much as all merchants. 



    4. Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with having

attempted, too successfully, to make things dear, than with

having aimed by wrong means at making them cheap. The usual

instrument for producing artificial dearness is monopoly. To

confer a monopoly upon a producer or leader, or upon a set of

producers or dealers not too numerous to combine, is to give them

the power of levying any amount of taxation on the public, for

their individual benefit, which will not make the public forego

the use of the commodity. When the sharers in the monopoly are so

numerous and so widely scattered that they are prevented from

combining, the evil is considerably less: but even then the

competition is not so active among a limited as among an

unlimited number. Those who feel assured of a fair average

proportion in the general business, are seldom eager to get a

larger share by foregoing a portion of their profits. A

limitation of competition, however partial, may have mischievous

effects quite disproportioned to the apparent cause. The mere

exclusion of foreigners, from a branch of industry open to the

free competition of every native, has been known, even in

England, to render that branch a conspicuous exception to the

general industrial energy of the country. The silk manufacture of

England remained far behind that of other countries of Europe, so

long as the foreign fabrics were prohibited. In addition to the

tax levied for the profit, real or imaginary, of the monopolists,

the consumer thus pays an additional tax for their laziness and

incapacity. When relieved from the immediate stimulus of

competition, producers and dealers grow indifferent to the

dictates of their ultimate pecuniary interest; preferring to the

most hopeful prospects, the present ease of adhering to routine.

A person who is already thriving, seldom puts himself out of his

way to commence even a lucrative improvement, unless urged by the

additional motive of fear lest some rival should supplant him by

getting possession of it before him. 

    The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to

patents, by which the originator of an improved process is

allowed to enjoy, for a limited period, the exclusive privilege

of using his own improvement. This is not making the commodity

dear for his benefit, but merely postponing a part of the

increased cheapness which the public owe to the inventor, in

order to compensate and reward him for the service. That he ought

to be both compensated and rewarded for it, will not be denied,

and also that if all were at once allowed to avail themselves of

his ingenuity, without having shared the labours or the expenses

which he had to incur in bringing his idea into a practical

shape, either such expenses and labours would be undergone by

nobody except very opulent and very public-spirited persons, or

the state must put a value on the service rendered by an

inventor, and make him a pecuniary grant. This has been done in

some instances, and may be done without inconvenience in cases of

very conspicuous public benefit; but in general an exclusive

privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable; because it

leaves nothing to any one's discretion; because the reward

conferred by it depends upon the invention's being found useful,

and the greater the usefulness the greater the reward; and

because it is paid by the very persons to whom the service is

rendered, the consumers of the commodity. So decisive, indeed,

are these considerations, that if the system of patents were

abandoned for that of rewards by the state, the best shape which

these could assume would be that of a small temporary tax,

imposed for the inventor's benefit, on all persons making use of

the invention. To this, however, or to any other system which

would vest in the state the power of deciding whether an inventor

should derive any pecuniary advantage from the public benefit

which he confers, the objections are evidently stronger and more

fundamental that the strongest which can possibly be urged

against patents. It is generally admitted that the present Patent

Laws need much improvement; but in this case, as well as in the

closely analogous one of Copyright, it would be a gross

immorality in the law to set everybody free to use a person's

work with. out his consent, and without giving him an equivalent.

I have seen with real alarm several recent attempts, in quarters

carrying some authority, to impugn the principle of patents

altogether; attempts which, if practically successful, would

enthrone free stealing under the prostituted name of free trade,

and make the men of brains, still more than at present, the needy

retainers and dependents of the men of money-bags. 



    5. I pass to another kind of government interference, in

which the end and the means are alike odious, but which existed

in England until not more than a generation ago, and in France up

to the year 1864. I mean the laws against combinations of workmen

to raise wages; laws enacted and maintained for the declared

purpose of keeping wages low, as the famous Statute of Labourers

was passed by a legislature of employers, to prevent the

labouring class, when its numbers had been thinned by a

pestilence, from taking advantage of the diminished competition

to obtain higher wages. Such laws exhibit the infernal spirit of

the slave master, when to retain the working classes in avowed

slavery has ceased to be practicable. 

    If it were possible for the working classes, by combining

among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages,

it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be

punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the

effect is quite beyond attainment by such means. The multitudes

who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely

scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If

they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the

hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They

would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an

increase of general wages at the expense of profits. But the

limits of this power are narrow; and were they to attempt to

strain it beyond those limits, this could only be accomplished by

keeping a part of their number permanently out of employment. As

support from public charity would of course be refused to those

who could get work and would not accept it, they would be thrown

for support upon the trades union of which they were members; and

the workpeople collectively would be no better off than before,

having to support the same numbers out of the same aggregate

wages. In this way, however, the class would have its attention

forcibly drawn to the fact of a superfluity of numbers, and to

the necessity, if they would have high wages, of proportioning

the supply of labour to the demand. 

    Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful, in

trades where the workpeople are few in number, and collected in a

small number of local centres. It is questionable if combinations

ever had the smallest effect on the permanent remuneration of

spinners or weavers; but the journeymen type.founders, by a close

combination, are able, it is said, to keep up a rate of wages

much beyond that which is usual in employments of equal hardness

and skill; and even the tailors, a much more numerous class, are

understood to have had, to some extent, a similar success. A rise

of wages, thus confined to particular employments, is not (like a

rise of general wages) defrayed from profits, but raises the

value and price of the particular article, and falls on the

consumer; the capitalist who produces the commodity being only

injured in so far as the high price tends to narrow the market;

and not even then, unless it does so in a greater ratio than that

of the rise of price: for though, at higher wages, he employs,

with a given capital, fewer workpeople, and obtains less of the

commodity, yet if he can sell the whole of this diminished

quantity at the higher price, his profits are as great as before.



    This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of

the remainder of the working class, ought not to be regarded as

an evil. The consumer, indeed, must pay for it; but cheapness of

goods is desirable only when the cause of it is that their

production costs little labour, and not when occasioned by that

labour's being ill remunerated. It may appear, indeed, at first

sight, that the high wages of the type.founders (for example) are

obtained at the general cost of the labouring class. This high

remuneration either causes fewer persons to find employment in

the trade, or if not, must lead to the investment of more capital

in it, at the expense of other trades: in the first case, it

throws an additional number of labourers on the general market;

in the second, it withdraws from that market a portion of the

demand: effects, both of which are injurious to the working

classes. Such, indeed, would really be the result of a successful

combination in a particular trade or trades, for some time after

its formation; but when it is a permanent thing, the principles

so often insisted upon in this treatise, show that it can have no

such effect. The habitual earnings of the working classes at

large can be affected by nothing but the habitual requirements of

the labouring people: these indeed may be altered, but while they

remain the same, wages never fall permanently below the standard

of these requirements, and do not long remain above that

standard. If there had been no combinations in particular trades,

and the wages of those trades had never been kept above the

common level, there is no reason to suppose that the common level

would have been at all higher than it now is. There would merely

have been a greater number of people altogether, and a smaller

number of exceptions to the ordinary low rate of wages.

    If, therefore, no improvement were to be hoped for in the

general circumstances of the working classes, the success of a

portion of them, however small, in keeping their wages by

combination above the market rate, would be wholly a matter of

satisfaction. But when the elevation of the character and

condition of the entire body has at last become a thing not

beyond the reach of rational effort, it is time that the better

paid classes of skilled artisans should seek their own advantage

in common with, and not by the exclusion of, their

fellow-labourers. While they continue to fix their hopes on

hedging themselves in against competition, and protecting their

own wages by shutting out others from access to their employment,

nothing better can be expected from them than that total absence

of any large and generous aims, that almost open disregard of all

other objects than high wages and little work for their own small

body, which were so deplorably evident in the proceedings and

manifestoes of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers during their

quarrel with their employers. Success, even if attainable, in

raising up a protected class of working people, would now be a

hindrance, instead of a help, to the emancipation of the working

classes at large. 

    But though combinations to keep up wages are seldom

effectual, and when effectual, are, for the reasons which I have

assigned, seldom desirable, the right of making the attempt is

one which cannot be refused to any portion of the working

population without great injustice, or without the probability of

fatally misleading them respecting the circumstances which

determine their condition. So long as combinations to raise wages

were prohibited by law, the law appeared to the operatives to be

the real cause of the low wages which there was no denying that

it had done its best to produce. Experience of strikes has been

the best teacher of the labouring classes on the subject of the

relation between wages and the demand and supply of labour: and

it is most important that this course of instruction should not

be disturbed. 

    It is a great error to condemn, per se and absolutely, either

trades unions or the collective action of strikes. Even assuming

that a strike must inevitably fail whenever it attempts to raise

wages above that market rate which is fixed by the demand and

supply; demand and supply are not physical agencies, which thrust

a given amount of wages into a labourer's hand without the

participation of his own will and actions. The market rate is not

fixed for him by some self-acting instrument, but is the result

of bargaining between human beings -- of what Adam Smith calls

'the higgling of the market"; and those who do not 'higgle' will

long continue to pay, even over a counter, more than the market

price for their purchases. Still more might poor labourers who

have to do with rich employers, remain long without the amount of

wages which the demand for their labour would justify, unless, in

vernacular phrase, they stood-out for it, and how can they stand

out for terms without organized concert? What chance would any

labourer have, who struck singly for an advance of wages? How

could he even know whether the state of the market admitted of a

rise, except by consultation with his fellows, naturally leading

to concerted action? I do not hesitate to say that associations

of labourers, of a nature similar to trades unions, far from

being a hindrance to a free market for labour, are the necessary

instrumentality of that free market; the indispensable means of

enabling the sellers of labour to take due care of their own

interests under a system of competition. There is an ulterior

consideration of much importance, to which attention was for the

first time drawn by Professor Fawcett, in an article in the

Westminster Review. Experience has at length enabled the more

intelligent trade to take a tolerably correct measure of the

circumstances on which the success of a strike for an advance of

wages depends. The work. men are now nearly as well informed as

the master, of the state of the market for his commodities; they

can calculate his gains and his expenses, they know when his

trade is or is not prosperous, and only when it is, are they ever

again likely to strike for higher wages; which wages their known

readiness to strike makes their employers for the most part

willing, in that case, to concede. The tendency, therefore, of

this state of things is to make a rise of wages in any particular

trade usually consequent upon a rise of profits, which, as Mr

Fawcett observes, is a commencement of that regular participation

of the labourers in the profits derived from their labour, every

tendency to which, for the reasOns stated in a previous

chapter,(2*) it is so important to encourage, since to it we have

chiefly to look for any radical improvement in the social and

economical relations between labour and capital. Strikes,

therefore, and the trade societies which render strikes possible,

are for these various reasons not a mischievous, but on the

contrary, a valuable part of the existing machinery of society.

    It is, however, an indispensable condition of tolerating

combinations, that they should be voluntary. No severity,

necessary to the purpose, is too great to be employed against

attempts to compel workmen to join a union, or take part in a

strike by threats or violence. Mere moral compulsion, by the

expression of opinion, the law ought not to interfere with; it

belongs to more enlightened opinion to restrain it, by rectifying

the moral sentiments of the people. Other questions arise when

the combination, being voluntary, proposes to itself objects

really contrary to the public good. High wages and short hours

are generally good objects, or, at all events, may be so: but in

many trades unions, it is among the rules that there shall be no

task work, or no difference of pay between the most expert

workmen and the most unskilful, or that no member of the union

shall earn more than a certain sum per week, in order that there

may be more employment for the rest; and the abolition of piece

work, under more or less of modification, held a conspicuous

place among the demands of the Amalgamated Society. These are

combinations to effect objects which are pernicious. Their

success, even when only partial, is a public mischief; and were

it complete, would be equal in magnitude to almost any of the

evils arising from bad economical legislation. Hardly anything

worse can be said of the worst laws on the subject of industry

and its remuneration, consistent with the personal freedom of the

labourer, than that they place the energetic and the idle, the

skilful and the incompetent, on a level: and this, in so far as

it is in itself possible, it is the direct tendency of the

regulations of these unions to do. It does not, however, follow

as a consequence that the law would be warranted in making the

formation of such associations illegal and punishable.

Independently of all considerations of constitutional liberty,

the best interests of the human race imperatively require that

all economical experiments, voluntarily undertaken, should have

the fullest licence, and that force and fraud should be the only

means of attempting to benefit themselves, which are interdicted

to the less fortunate classes of the community.(3*) 



    6. Among the modes of undue exercise of the power of

government, on which I have commented in this chapter, I have

included only such as rest on theories which have still more or

less of footing in the most enlightened countries. I have not

spoken of some which have done still greater mischief in times

not long past, but which are now generally given up, at least in

theory, though enough of them still remains in practice to make

it impossible as yet to class them among exploded errors. 

    The notion, for example, that a government should choose

opinions for the people, and should not suffer any doctrines in

politics, morals, law, or religion, but such as it approves, to

be printed or publicly professed, may be said to be altogether

abandoned as a general thesis. It is now well understood that a

regime of this sort is fatal to all prosperity, even of an

economical kind: that the human mind when prevented either by

fear of the law or by fear of opinion from exercising its

faculties freely on the most important subjects, acquires a

general torpidity and imbecility, by which, when they reach a

certain point, it is disqualified from making any considerable

advances even in the common affairs of life, and which, when

greater still, make it gradually lose even its previous

attainments. There cannot be a more decisive example than Spain

and Portugal, for two centuries after the Reformation. The

decline of those countries in national greatness, and even in

material civilization, while almost all the other nations of

Europe were uninterruptedly advancing, has been ascribed to

various causes, but there is one which lies at the foundation of

them all: the Holy Inquisition, and the system of mental slavery

of which it is the symbol. 

    Yet although these truths are very widely recognized, and

freedom both of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an axiom

in all free countries, this apparent liberality and tolerance has

acquired so little of the authority of a principle, that it is

always ready to give way to the dread or horror inspired by some

particular sort of opinions. Within the last fifteen or twenty

years several individuals have suffered imprisonment, for the

public profession, sometimes in a very temperate manner, of

disbelief in religion; and it is probable that both the public

and the government, at the first panic which arises on the

subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar means for

checking the propagation of democratic or anti-property

doctrines. In this country, however, the effective restraints on

mental freedom proceed much less from the law or the government,

than from the intolerant temper of the national mind; arising no

longer from even as respectable a source as bigotry or

fanaticism, but rather from the general habit, both in opinion

and conduct, of making adherence to custom the rule of life, and

enforcing it, by social penalties, against all persons who,

without a party to back them, assert their individual

independence. 





NOTES:



1. To this Mr Carey would reply (indeed he has already so replied

in advance) that of all commodities manure is the least

susceptible of being conveyed to a distance. this is true of

sewage, and of stable manure, but not true of the ingredients to

which those manures owe their efficiency. These, on the contrary,

are chiefly substances containing great fertilizing power in

small bulk; substances of which the human body requires but a

small quantity, and hence peculiarly susceptible of being

imported; the mineral alkalies and the phosphates, the question

indeed mainly concerns the phosphates, for of the alkalies, soda

is procurable everywhere; while potass, being one of the

constituents of granite and the other feldspathic rocks, exists

in many subsoils, by whose progressive decomposition it is

renewed, a large quantity also being brought down in the deposits

of rivers. As for the phosphates, they, in the very convenient

form of pulverized bones, are a regular article of commerce,

largely imported into England; as they are sure to be into any

country where the conditions of industry make it worth while to

pay the price. 



2. Supra, Bk. V, Ch. VII.



3. Whoever desires to understand the question of Trade

Combinations as seen from the point of view of the working

people, should make himself acquainted with a pamphlet published

in 1860, under the title 'Trades Unions and Strikes, their

Philosophy and Intention; by T.J. Dunning, Secretary to the

London Consolidated Society of Bookbinders'. There are many

opinions in this able tract in which I only partially, and some

in which I do not at all, coincide. But there are also many sound

arguments, and an instructive exposure of the common fallacies of

opponents. Readers of other classes will see with surprise, not

only how great a portion of truth the Unions have on their side,

but how much less flagrant and condemnable even their errors

appear, when seen under the aspect in which it is only natural

that the working classes should themselves regard them. 


