The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 5

Chapter 5

Of Some Other Taxes

    1. Besides direct taxes on income, and taxes on consumption,
the financial systems of most countries comprise a variety of
miscellaneous imposts, not strictly included in either class. The
modern European systems retain many such taxes, though in much
less number and variety than those semi-barbarous governments
which European influence has not yet reached. In some of these,
scarcely any incident of life has escaped being made an excuse
for some fiscal exaction; hardly any act, not belonging to daily
routine, can be performed by any one, without obtaining leave
from some agent of government, which is only granted in
consideration of a payment: especially when the act requires the
aid or the peculiar guarantee of a public authority. In the
present treatise we may confine our attention to such taxes as
lately existed, or still exist, in countries usually classed as
civilized. 
    In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn from
taxes on contracts. These are imposed in various forms. One
expedient is that of taxing the legal instrument which serves as
evidence of the contract, and which is commonly the only evidence
legally admissible. In England, scarcely any contract is binding
unless executed on stamped paper, which has paid a tax to
government; and until very lately, when the contract related to
property the tax was proportionally much heavier on the smaller
than on the larger transactions; which is still true of some of
those taxes. There are also stamp-duties on the legal instruments
which are evidence of the fulfilment of contracts; such as
acknowledgments of receipt, and deeds of release. Taxes on
contracts are not always levied by means of stamps. The duty on
sales by auction, abrogated by Sir Robert Peel, was an instance
in point. The taxes on transfers of landed property, in France,
are another: in England there are stamp-duties. In some
countries, contracts of many kinds are not valid unless
registered, and their registration is made an occasion for a tax.

    Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on the
transfer of property; chiefly on purchases and sales. Taxes on
the sale of consumable commodities are simply taxes on those
commodities. If they affect only some particular commodities,
they raise the prices of those commodities, and are paid by the
consumer. If the attempt were made to tax all purchases and
sales, which, however absurd, was for centuries the law of Spain,
the tax, if it could be enforced, would be equivalent to a tax on
all commodities, and would not affect prices: if levied from the
sellers, it would be a tax on profits, if from the buyers, a tax
on consumption; and neither class could throw the burthen upon
the other. If confined to some one mode of sale, as for example
by auction, it discourages recourse to that mode, and if of any
material amount, prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in
a case of emergency; in which case as the seller is under a
necessity to sell, but the buyer under no necessity to buy, the
tax falls on the seller; and this was the strongest of the
objections to the auction duty: it almost always fell on a
necessitous person, and in the crisis of his necessities.
    Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most
countries, liable to the same objection. Landed property in old
countries is seldom parted with, except from reduced
circumstances, or some urgent need: the seller, therefore, must
take what he can get, while the buyer, whose object is an
investment, makes his calculations on the interest which he can
obtain for his money in other ways, and will not buy if he is
charged with a government tax on the transaction.(1*) It has
indeed been objected, that this argument would not apply if all
modes of permanent investment, such as the purchase of government
securities, shares in joint-stock companies, mortgages, and the
like, were subject to the same tax. But even then, if paid by the
buyer, it would be equivalent to a tax on interest: if
sufficiently heavy to be of any importance, it would disturb the
established relation between interest and profit; and the
disturbance would redress itself by a rise in the rate of
interest, and a fall of the price of land and of all securities.
It appears to me, therefore, that the seller is the person by
whom such taxes, unless under peculiar circumstances, will
generally be borne. 
    All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in the way
of the sale of land, or other instruments of production. Such
sales tend naturally to render the property more productive. The
seller, whether moved by necessity or choice, is probably some
one who is either without the means, or without the capacity, to
make the most advantageous use of the property for productive
purposes; while the buyer, on the other hand, is at any rate not
needy, and is frequently both inclined and able to improve the
property, since, as it is worth more to such a person than to any
other, he is likely to offer the highest price for it. All taxes,
therefore, and all difficulties and expenses, annexed to such
contracts, are decidedly detrimental; especially in the case of
land, the source of subsistence, and the original foundation of
all wealth, on the improvement of which, therefore, so much
depends. Too great facilities cannot be given to enable land to
pass into the hands, and assume the modes of aggregation or
division, most conducive to its productiveness. If landed
properties are too large, alienation should be free, in order
that they may be subdivided; if too small, in order that they may
be united. All taxes on the transfer of landed property should be
abolished; but, as the landlords have no claim to be relieved
from any reservation which the state has hitherto made in its own
favour from the amount of their rent, an annual impost equivalent
to the average produce of these taxes should be distributed over
the land generally, in the form of a land-tax. 
    Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, imposing
a virtual penalty upon transactions which it ought to be the
policy of the legislator to encourage. Of this sort is the
stamp-duty on leases, which in a country of large properties are
an essential condition of good agriculture; and the taxes on
insurances, a direct discouragement to prudence and forethought. 

    2. Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts are those on
communication. The principal of these is the postage tax; to
which may be added taxes on advertisements, and on newspapers,
which are taxes on the communication of information. 
    The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance of
letters, is by making the government the sole authorized carrier
of them, and demanding a monopoly price. When this price is so
moderate as it is in this country under the uniform penny
postage, scarcely if at all exceeding what would be charged under
the freest competition by any private company, it can hardly be
considered as taxation, but rather as the profits of a business;
whatever excess there is above the ordinary profits of stock
being a fair result of the saving of expense, caused by having
only one establishment and one set of arrangements for the whole
country, instead of many competing ones. The business, too, being
one which both can and ought to be conducted on fixed rules, is
one of the few businesses which it is not unsuitable to a
government to conduct. The post office, therefore, is at present
one of the best of the sources from which this country derives
its revenue. But a postage much exceeding what would be paid for
the same service in a system of freedom, is not a desirable tax.
Its chief weight falls on letters of business, and increases the
expense of mercantile relations between distant places. It is
like an attempt to raise a large revenue by heavy tolls: it
obstructs all operations by which goods are conveyed from place
to place, and discourages the production of commodities in one
place for consumption in another; which is not only in itself one
of the greatest sources of economy of labour, but is a necessary
condition of almost all improvements in production, and one of
the strongest stimulants to industry, and promoters of
civilization. 
    The tax on advertisements was not free from the same
objection, since in whatever degree advertisements are useful to
business, by facilitating the coming together of the dealer or
producer and the consumer, in that same degree, if the tax be
high enough to be a serious discouragement to advertising, it
prolongs the period during which goods remain unsold, and capital
locked up in idleness. 
    A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where it
does fall as where is does not, that is, where it prevents
newspapers from being used. To the generality of those who buy
them, newspapers are a luxury which they can as well afford to
pay for as any other indulgence, and which is as unexceptionable
a source of revenue. But to that large part of the community who
have been taught to read, but have received little other
intellectual education, newspapers are the source of nearly all
the general information which they possess, and of nearly all
their acquaintance with the ideas and topics current among
mankind; and an interest is more easily excited in newspapers,
than in books or other more recondite sources of instruction.
Newspapers contribute so little, in a direct way, to the
origination of useful ideas, that many persons undervalue the
importance of their office in disseminating them. They correct
many prejudices and superstitions, and keep up a habit of
discussion, and interest in public concerns, the absence of which
is a great cause of stagnation of mind usually found in the lower
and middle, if not in all, ranks, of those countries where
newspapers of an important or interesting character do not exist.
There ought to be no taxes (as in this country there now are not)
which render this great diffuser of information, of mental
excitement, and mental exercise, less accessible to that portion
of the public which most needs to be carried into a region of
ideas and interests beyond its own limited horizon. 

    3. In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous place must
be assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue for the state
from the various operations involved in an application to the
tribunals. Like all needless expenses attached to law
proceedings, they are a tax on redress, and therefore a premium
on injury. Although such taxes have been abolished in this
country as a general source of revenue, they still exist in the
form of fees of court, for defraying the expense of the courts of
justice; under the idea, apparently, that those may fairly be
required to bear the expenses of the administration of justice,
who reap the benefit of it. The fallacy of this doctrine was
powerfully exposed by Bentham. As he remarked, those who are
under the necessity of going to law, are those who benefit least,
not most, by the law and its administration. To them the
protection which the law affords has not been complete, since
they have been obliged to resort to a court of justice to
ascertain their rights, or maintain those rights against
infringement: while the remainder of the public have enjoyed the
immunity from injury conferred by the law and the tribunals,
without the inconvenience of an appeal to them. 

    4. Besides the general taxes of the State, there are in all
or most countries local taxes, to defray any expenses of a public
nature which it is thought best to place under the control or
management of a local authority. Some of these expenses are
incurred for purposes in which the particular locality is solely
or chiefly interested; as the paving, cleansing, and lighting of
the streets; or the making and repairing of roads and bridges,
which may be important to people from any part of the country,
but only in so far as they, or goods in which they have an
interest, pass along the roads or over the bridges. In other
cases again, the expenses are of a kind as nationally important
as any others, but are defrayed locally because supposed more
likely to be well administered by local bodies; as, in England,
the relief of the poor, and the support of gaols, and in some
other countries, of schools. To decide for what public objects
local superintendence is best suited, and what are those which
should be kept immediately under the central government, or under
a mixed system of local management and central superintendence,
is a question not of political economy, but of administration. It
is an important principle, however, that taxes imposed by a local
authority, being less amenable to publicity and discussion than
the acts of the government, should always be special - laid on
for some definite service, and not exceeding the expense actually
incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it is desirable,
whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall on those to
whom the service is rendered; that the expense, for instance, of
roads and bridges, should be defrayed by a toll on passengers and
goods conveyed by them, thus dividing the cost between those who
use them for pleasure or convenience, and the consumers of the
goods which they enable to be brought to and from the market at a
diminished expense. When, however, the tolls have repaid with
interest the whole of the expenditure, the road or bridge should
be thrown open free of toll, that it may be used also by those to
whom, unless open gratuitously, it would be valueless; provision
being made for repairs either from the funds of the state, or by
a rate levied on the localities which reap the principal benefit.
    In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal duty
of the City of London, and a few similar imposts, being the chief
exceptions), though the greatest part of the taxation for general
purposes is indirect. On the contrary, in France, Austria, and
other countries where direct taxation is much more largely
employed by the state, the local expenses of towns are
principally defrayed by taxes levied on commodities when entering
them. These indirect taxes are much more objectionable in towns
than on the frontier, because the things which the country
supplies to the towns are chiefly the necessaries of life and the
materials of manufacture, while, of what a country imports from
foreign countries, the greater part usually consists of luxuries.
An octroi cannot produce a large revenue, without pressing
severely upon the labouring classes of the towns; unless their
wages rise proportionally, in which case the tax falls in a great
measure on the consumers of town produce, whether residing in
town or country, since capital will not remain in the towns if
its profits fall below their ordinary proportion as compared with
the rural districts. 

NOTES:

1. The statement in the text requires modification in the case of
countries where the land is owned in small portions. These, being
neither a badge of importance, nor in general an object of local
attachment, are readily parted with at a small advance on their
original cost, with the intention of buying elsewhere; and the
desire of acquiring land even on disadvantageous terms is so
great, as to be little checked by even a high rate of taxation. 

