The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 5: On The Influence of Government

Chapter 1

Of the Functions of Government in General

    1. One of the most disputed questions both in political
science and in practical statesmanship at this particular period,
relates to the proper limits of the functions and agency of
governments. At other times it has been a subject of controversy
how governments should be constituted, and according to what
principles and rules they should exercise their authority; but it
is now almost equally a question, to what departments of human
affairs that authority should extend. And when the tide sets so
strongly towards changes in government and legislation, as a
means of improving the condition of mankind, this discussion is
more likely to increase than to diminish in interest. On the one
hand, impatient reformers, thinking it easier and shorter to get
possession of the government than of the intellects and
dispositions of the public, are under a constant temptation to
stretch the province of government beyond due bounds: while, on
the other, mankind have been so much accustomed by their rulers
to interference for purposes other than the public good, or under
an erroneous conception of what that good requires, and so many
rash proposals are made by sincere lovers of improvement, for
attempting, by compulsory regulation, the attainment of objects
which can only be effectually or only usefully compassed by
opinion and discussion, that there has grown up a spirit of
resistance in limine to the interference of government, merely as
such, and a disposition to restrict its sphere of action within
the narrowest bounds. From differences in the historical
development of different nations, not necessary to be here dwelt
upon, the former excess, that of exaggerating the province of
government, prevails most, both in theory and in practice, among
the Continental nations, while in England the contrary spirit has
hitherto been predominant. 
    The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a
question of principle, I shall make an attempt to determine in a
later chapter of this Book: after first considering the effects
produced by the conduct of government in the exercise of the
functions universally acknowledged to belong to it. For this
purpose, there must be a specification of the functions which are
either inseparable from the idea of a government, or are
exercised habitually and without objection by all governments; as
distinguished from those respecting which it has been considered
questionable whether governments should exercise them or not. The
former may be termed the necessary, the latter the optional,
functions of government. By the term optional it is not meant to
imply, that it can ever be a matter of indifference, or of
arbitrary choice, whether the government should or should not
take upon itself the functions in question; but only that the
expediency of its exercising them does not amount to necessity,
and is a subject on which diversity of opinion does or may exist.


    2. In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions of
government, we find them to be considerably more multifarious
than most people are at first aware of, and not capable of being
circumscribed by those very definite lines of demarcation, which,
in the inconsiderateness of popular discussion, it is often
attempted to draw round them. We sometimes, for example, hear it
said that governments ought to confine themselves to affording
protection against force and fraud: that, these two things apart,
people should be free agents, able to take care of themselves,
and that so long as a person practises no violence or deception,
to the injury of others in person or property, legislatures and
governments are in no way called on to concern themselves about
him. But why should people be protected by their government, that
is, by their own collective strength, against violence and fraud,
and not against other evils, except that the expediency is more
obvious? If nothing, but what people cannot possibly do for
themselves, can be fit to be done for them by government, people
might be required to protect themselves by their skill and
courage even against force, or to beg or buy protection against
it, as they actually do where the government is not capable of
protecting them: and against fraud every one has the protection
of his own wits. But without further anticipating the discussion
of principles, it is sufficient on the present occasion to
consider facts. 
    Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of
fraud, are we to place the operation, for example, of the laws of
inheritance? Some such laws must exist in all societies. It may
be said, perhaps, that in this matter government has merely to
give effect to the disposition which an individual makes of his
own property by will. This, however, is at least extremely
disputable; there is probably no country by whose laws the power
of testamentary disposition is perfectly absolute. And suppose
the very common case of there being no will: does not the law,
that is, the government, decide on principles of general
expediency, who shall take the succession? and in case the
successor is in any manner incompetent, does it not appoint
persons, frequently officers of its own, to collect the property
and apply it to his benefit? There are many other cases in which
the government undertakes the administration of property, because
the public interest, or perhaps only that of the particular
persons concerned, is thought to require it. This is often done
in case of litigated property; and in cases of judicially
declared insolvency. It has never been contended that in doing
these things, a government exceeds its province. 
    Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself,
so simple a thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined,
perhaps, that the law has only to declare and protect the right
of every one to what he has himself produced, or acquired by the
voluntary consent, fairly obtained, of those who produced it. But
is there nothing recognized as property except what has been
produced? Is there not the earth itself, its forests and waters,
and all other natural riches, above and below the surface? These
are the inheritance of the human race, and there must be
regulations for the common enjoyment of it. What rights, and
under what conditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise over
any portion of this common inheritance, cannot be left undecided.
No function of government is less optional than the regulation of
these things, or more completely involved in the idea of
civilized society. 
    Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence or
treachery; but under which of these heads are we to place the
obligation imposed on people to perform their contracts?
Nonperformance does not necessarily imply fraud; the person who
entered into the contract may have sincerely intended to fulfil
it: and the term fraud, which can scarcely admit of being
extended even to the case of voluntary breach of contract when no
deception was practised, is certainly not applicable when the
omission to perform is a case of negligence. Is it no part of the
duty of governments to enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of
non-interference would no doubt be stretched a little, and it
would be said, that enforcing contracts is not regulating the
affairs of individuals at the pleasure of government, but giving
effect to their own expressed desire. Let us acquiesce in this
enlargement of the restrictive theory, and take it for what it is
worth. But governments do not limit their concern with contracts
to a simple enforcement. They take upon themselves to determine
what contracts are fit to be enforced. It is not enough that one
person, not being either cheated or compelled, makes a promise to
another. There are promises by which it is not for the public
good that persons should have the power of binding themselves. To
say nothing of engagements to do something contrary to law, there
are engagements which the law refuses to enforce, for reasons
connected with the interest of the promiser, or with the general
policy of the state. A contract by which a person sells himself
to another as a slave, would be declared void by the tribunals of
this and of most other European countries. There are few nations
whose laws enforce a contract for what is looked upon as
prostitution, or any matrimonial engagement of which the
conditions vary in any respect from those which the law has
thought fit to prescribe. But when once it is admitted that there
are any engagements which for reasons of expediency the law ought
not to enforce, the same question is necessarily opened with
respect to all engagements. Whether, for example, the law should
enforce a contract to labour, when the wages are too low or the
hours of work too severe: whether it should enforce a contract by
which a person binds himself to remain, for more than a very
limited period, in the service of a given individual: whether a
contract of marriage, entered into for life, should continue to
be enforced against the deliberate will of the persons, or of
either of the persons, who entered into it. Every question which
can possibly arise as to the policy of contracts, and of the
relations which they establish among human beings, is a question
for the legislator; and one which he cannot escape from
considering, and in some way or other deciding. 
    Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud
afford appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and
criminal judges; but there are also civil tribunals. The
punishment of wrong is one business of an administration of
justice, but the decision of disputes is another. innumerable
disputes arise between persons, without mala fides on either
side, through misconception of their legal rights, or from not
being agreed about the facts, on the proof of which those rights
are legally dependent. Is it not for the general interest that
the State should appoint persons to clear up these uncertainties
and terminate these disputes? It cannot be said to be a case of
absolute necessity. People might appoint an arbitrator, and
engage to submit to his decision; and they do so where there are
no courts of justice, or where the courts are not trusted, or
where their delays and expenses, or the irrationality of their
rules of evidence, deter people from resorting to them. Still, it
is universally thought right that the State should establish
civil tribunals; and if their defects often drive people to have
recourse to substitutes, even then the power held in reserve of
carrying the case before a legally constituted court, gives to
the substitutes their principal efficacy. 
    Not only does the State undertake to decide disputes, it
takes precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise. The
laws of most countries lay down rules for determining many
things, not because it is of much consequence in what way they
are determined, but in order that they may be determined somehow,
and there may be no question on the subject. The law prescribes
forms of words for many kinds of contract, in order that no
dispute or misunderstanding may arise about their meaning: it
makes provision that if a dispute does arise, evidence shall be
procurable for deciding it, by requiring that the document be
attested by witnesses and executed with certain formalities. The
law preserves authentic evidence of facts to which legal
consequences are attached, by keeping a registry of such facts;
as of births, deaths, and marriages, of wills and contracts, and
of judicial proceedings. In doing these things, it has never been
alleged that government oversteps the proper limits of its
functions. 
    Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine that
individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests, and
that government owes nothing to them but to save them from being
interfered with by other people, the doctrine can never be
applicable to any persons but those who are capable of acting in
their own behalf. The individual may be an infant, or a lunatic,
or fallen into imbecility. The law surely must look after the
interests of such persons. It does not necessarily do this
through officers of its own. It often devolves the trust upon
some relative or connexion. But in doing so is its duty ended?
Can it make over the interests of one person to the control of
another, and be excused from supervision, or from holding the
person thus trusted, responsible for the discharge of the trust? 
    There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with
general approbation, assume powers and execute functions for
which no reason can be assigned except the simple one, that they
conduce to general convenience. We may take as an example, the
function (which is a monopoly too) of coining money. This is
assumed for no more recondite purpose than that of saving to
individuals the trouble, delay, and expense of weighing and
assaying. No one, however, even of those most jealous of state
interference, has objected to this as an improper exercise of the
powers of government. Prescribing a set of standard weights and
measures is another instance. Paving, lighting, and cleansing the
streets and thoroughfares, is another; whether done by the
general government, or as is more usual, and generally more
advisable, by a municipal authority. Making or improving
harbours, building lighthouses, making surveys in order to have
accurate maps and charts, raising dykes to keep the sea out, and
embankments to keep rivers in, are cases in point. 
    Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intruding
on any disputed ground. But enough has been said to show that the
admitted functions of government embrace a much wider field than
can easily be included within the ring-fence of any restrictive
definition, and that it is hardly possible to find any ground of
justification common to them all, except the comprehensive one of
general expediency; nor to limit the interference of government
by any universal rule, save the simple and vague one, that it
should never be admitted but when the case of expediency is
strong. 
    3. Some observations, however, may be usefully bestowed on
the nature of the considerations on which the question of
government interference is most likely to turn, and on the mode
of estimating the comparative magnitude of the expediencies
involved. This will form the last of the three parts, into which
our discussion of the principles and effects of government
interference may conveniently be divided. The following will be
our division of the subject. 
    We shall first consider the economical effects arising from
the manner in which governments perform their necessary and
acknowledged functions. 
    We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences of
what I have termed the optional kind (i.e. overstepping the
boundaries of the universally acknowledged functions) which have
heretofore taken place, and in some cases still take place, under
the influence of false general theories. 
    It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently of
any false theory, and consistently with a correct view of the
laws which regulate human affairs, there be any cases of the
optional class in which governmental interference is really
advisable, and what are those cases. 
    The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneous
character: since the necessary functions of government, and those
which are so manifestly expedient that they have never or very
rarely been objected to, are, as already pointed out, too various
to be brought under any very simple classification. Those,
however, which are of principal importance, which alone it is
necessary here to consider, may be reduced to the following
general heads. 
    First, the means adopted by governments to raise the revenue
which is the condition of their existence. 
    Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on the
two great subjects of Property and Contracts. 
    Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means by
which they enforce generally the execution of their laws, namely,
their judicature and police. 
    We commence with the first head, that is, with the theory of
Taxation. 

