


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 5



Chapter 11



Of the Grounds and Limits of the Laisser-faire or

Non-interference Principle



    1. We have now reached the last part of our undertaking; the

discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that is, so far as

it is a question of principle, not detail) of the limits of the

province of government: the question, to what objects

governmental intervention in the affairs of society may or should

extend, over and above those which necessarily appertain to it.

No subject has been more keenly contested in the present age: the

contest, however, has chiefly taken place round certain select

points, with only flying excursions into the rest of the field.

Those indeed who have discussed any particular question of

government interference, such as state education (spiritual or

secular), regulation of hours of labour, a public provision for

the poor, &c., have often dealt largely in general arguments, far

outstretching the special application made of them, and have

shown a sufficiently strong bias either in favour of letting

things alone, or in favour of meddling; but have seldom declared,

or apparently decided in their own minds, how far they would

carry either principle. The supporters of interference have been

content with asserting a general right and duty on the part of

government to intervene, wherever its intervention would be

useful: and when those who have been called the laisser-faire

school have attempted any definite limitation of the province of

government, they have usually restricted it to the protection of

person and property against force and fraud; a definition to

which neither they nor any one else can deliberately adhere,

since it excludes, as has been shown in a preceding chapter,(1*)

some of the most indispensable and unanimously recognized of the

duties of government. 

    Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a

general theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive,

admit of any universal solution, I shall attempt to afford some

little aid towards the resolution of this class of questions as

they arise, by examining, in the most general point of view in

which the subject can be considered, what are the advantages, and

what the evils or inconveniences, of government interference. 

    We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of

intervention by the government, which, though they may relate to

the same subject, differ widely in their nature and effects, and

require, for their justification, motives of a very different

degree of urgency. The intervention may extend to controlling the

free agency of individuals. Government may interdict all persons

from doing certain things; or from doing them without its

authorization; or may prescribe to them certain things to be

done, or a certain manner of doing things which it is left

optional with them to do or to abstain from. This is the

authoritative interference of government. There is another kind

of intervention which is not authoritative: when a government,

instead of issuing a command and enforcing it by penalties,

adopts the course so seldom resorted to by governments, and of

which such important use might be made, that of giving advice and

promulgating information; or when, leaving individuals free to

use their own means of pursuing any object of general interest,

the government, not meddling with them, but not trusting the

object solely to their care, establishes, side by side with their

arrangements, an agency of its own for a like purpose. Thus, it

is one thing to maintain a Church Establishment, and another to

refuse toleration to other religions, or to persons professing no

religion. It is one thing to provide schools or colleges, and

another to require that no person shall act as an instructor of

youth without a government licence. There might be a national

bank, or a government manufactory, without any monopoly against

private banks and manufactories. There might be a post-office,

without penalties against the conveyance of letters by any other

means. There may be a corps of government engineers for civil

purposes, while the profession of a civil engineer is free to be

adopted by every one. There may be public hospitals, without any

restriction upon private medical or surgical practice. 



    2. It is evident, even at first sight, that the authoritative

form of government intervention has a much more limited sphere of

legitimate action than the other. It requires a much stronger

necessity to justify it in any case; while there are large

departments of human life from which it must be unreservedly and

imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adopt respecting the

foundation of the social union, and under whatever political

institutions we live, there is a circle around every individual

human being, which no government, be it that of one, of a few, or

of the many, ought to be permitted to overstep: there is a part

of the life of every person who has come to years of discretion,

within which the individuality of that person ought to reign

uncontrolled either by any other individual or by the public

collectively. That there is, or ought to be, some space in human

existence thus entrenched around, and sacred from authoritative

intrusion, no one who professes the smallest regard to human

freedom or dignity will call in question: the point to be

determined is, where the limit should be placed; how large a

province of human life this reserved territory should include. I

apprehend that it ought to include all that part which concerns

only the life, whether inward or outward, of the individual, and

does not affect the interests of others, or affects them only

through the moral influence of example. With respect to the

domain of the inward consciousness, the thoughts and feelings,

and as much of external conduct as is personal only, involving no

consequences, none at least of a painful or injurious kind, to

other people: I hold that it is allowable in all, and in the more

thoughtful and cultivated often a duty, to assert and promulgate,

with all the force they are capable of, their opinion of what is

good or bad, admirable or contemptible, but not to compel others

to conform to that opinion; whether the force used is that of

extra.legal coercion, or exerts itself by means of the law. 

    Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the

interest of others, the onus of making out a case always lies on

the defenders of legal prohibitions. It is not a merely

constructive or presumptive injury to others, which will justify

the interference of law with individual freedom. To be prevented

from doing what one is inclined to, from acting according to

one's own judgment of what is desirable, is not only always

irksome, but always tends, pro tanto, to starve the development

of some portion of the bodily or mental faculties, either

sensitive or active; and unless the conscience of the individual

goes freely with the legal restraint, it partakes, either in a

great or in a small degree, of the degradation of slavery.

Scarcely any degree of utility, short of absolute necessity, will

justify a prohibitory regulation, unless it can also be made to

recommend itself to the general conscience; unless persons of

ordinary good intentions either believe already, or can be

induced to believe, that the thing prohibited is a thing which

they ought not to wish to do. 

    It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do not

restrain individual free agency. When a government provides means

of fulfilling a certain end, leaving individuals free to avail

themselves of different means if in their opinion preferable,

there is no infringement of liberty, no irksome or degrading

restraint. One of the principal objections to government

interference is then absent. There is, however, in almost all

forms of government agency, one thing which is compulsory. the

provision of the pecuniary means. These are derived from

taxation; or, if existing in the form of an endowment derived

from public property, they are still the cause of as much

compulsory taxation as the sale or the annual proceeds of the

property would enable to be dispensed with.(2*) And the objection

necessarily attaching to compulsory contributions, is almost

always greatly aggravated by the expensive precautions and

onerous restrictions, which are indispensable to prevent evasion

of a compulsory tax. 



    3. A second general objection to government agency, is that

every increase of the functions devolving on the government is an

increase of its power, both in the form of authority, and still

more, in the indirect form of influence. The importance of this

consideration, in respect of political freedom, has in general

been quite sufficiently recognized, at least in England, but

many, in latter times, have been prone to think that limitation

of the powers of the government is only essential when the

government itself is badly constituted; when it does not

represent the people, but is the organ of a class, or coalition

of classes: and that a government of sufficiently popular

constitution might be trusted with any amount of power over the

nation, since its power would be only that of the nation over

itself. This might be true, if the nation, in such cases, did not

practically mean a mere majority of the nation, and if minorities

were only capable of oppressing, but not of being oppressed.

Experience, however, proves that the depositaries of power who

are mere delegates of the people, that is of a majority, are

quite as ready (when they think they can count on popular

support) as any organs of oligarchy, to assume arbitrary power,

and encroach unduly on the liberty of private life. The public

collectively is abundantly ready to impose, not only its

generally narrow views of its interests, but its abstract

opinions, and even its tastes, as laws binding upon individuals.

And the present civilization tends so strongly to make the power

of persons acting in masses the only substantial power in

society, that there never was more necessity for surrounding

individual independence of thought, speech, and conduct, with the

most powerful defences, in order to maintain that originality of

mind and individuality of character, which are the only source of

any real progress, and of most of the qualities which make the

human race much superior to any herd of animals. Hence it is no

less important in a democratic than in any other government, that

all tendency on the part of public authorities to stretch their

interference, and assume a power of any sort which can easily be

dispensed with, should be regarded with unremitting jealousy.

Perhaps this is even more important in a democracy than in any

other form of political society; because where public opinion is

sovereign, an individual who is oppressed by the sovereign does

not, as in most other states of things, find a rival power to

which he can appeal for relief, or, at all events, for sympathy. 



    4. A third general objection to government agency, rests on

the principle of the division of labour. Every additional

function undertaken by the government, is a fresh occupation

imposed upon a body already overcharged with duties. A natural

consequence is that most things are ill done; much not done at

all, because the government is not able to do it without delays

which are fatal to its purpose; that the more troublesome and

less showy, of the functions undertaken, are postponed or

neglected, and an excuse is always ready for the neglect; while

the heads of the administration have their minds so fully taken

up with official details, in however perfunctory a manner

superintended, that they have no time or thought to spare for the

great interests of the state, and the preparation of enlarged

measures of social improvement. 

    But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result

much more from the bad organization of governments, than from the

extent and variety of the duties undertaken by them. Government

is not a name for some one functionary, or definite number of

functionaries: there may be almost any amount of division of

labour within the administrative body itself. The evil in

question is felt in great magnitude under some of the governments

of the Continent, where six or eight men, living at the capital

and known by the name of ministers, demand that the whole public

business of the country shall pass, or be supposed to pass, under

their individual eye. But the inconvenience would be reduced to a

very manageable compass, in a country in which there was a proper

distribution of functions between the central and local officers

of government, and in which the central body was divided into a

sufficient number of departments. When Parliament thought it

expedient to confer on the government an inspecting and partially

controlling authority over railways, it did not add railways to

the department of the Home Minister, but created a Railway Board.

When it determined to have a central superintending authority for

pauper administration, it established the Poor Law Commission.

There are few countries in which a greater number of functions

are discharged by public officers, than in some states of the

American Union, particularly the New England States; but the

division of labour in public business is extreme; most of these

officers being not even amenable to any common superior, but

performing their duties freely, under the double check of

election by their townsmen, and civil as well as criminal

responsibility to the tribunals. 

    It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that the

chiefs of the administration, whether permanent or temporary,

should extend a commanding, though general, view over the

ensemble of all the interests confided, in any degree, to the

responsibility of the central power. But with a skilful internal

organization of the administrative machine, leaving to

subordinates, and as far as possible, to local subordinates, not

only the execution, but to a greater degree the control, of

details; holding them accountable for the results of their acts

rather than for the acts themselves, except where these come

within the cognizance of the tribunals; taking the most effectual

securities for honest and capable appointments; opening a broad

path to promotion from the inferior degrees of the administrative

scale to the superior; leaving, at each step, to the functionary,

a wider range in the origination of measures, so that, in the

highest grade of all, deliberation might be concentrated on the

great collective interests of the country in each department; if

all this were done, the government would not probably be

overburthened by any business, in other respects fit to be

undertaken by it; though the overburthening would remain as a

serious addition to the inconveniences incurred by its

undertaking any which was unfit. 



    5. But though a better organization of governments would

greatly diminish the force of the objection to the mere

multiplication of their duties, it would still remain true that

in all the more advanced communities, the great majority of

things are worse done by the intervention of government, than the

individuals most interested in the matter would do them, or cause

them to be done, if left to themselves. The grounds of this truth

are expressed with tolerable exactness in the poplar dictum, that

people understand their own business and their own interests

better, and care for them more, than the government does, or can

be expected to do. This maxim holds true throughout the greatest

part of the business of life, and wherever it is true we ought to

condemn every kind of government intervention that conflicts with

it. The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of

the common operations of industry or commerce, is proved by the

fact, that it is hardly ever able to maintain.. itself in equal

competition with individual agency, where the individuals possess

the requisite degree of industrial enterprise, and can command

the necessary assemblage of means. All the facilities which a

government enjoys of access to information; all the means which

it possesses of remunerating, and therefore of commanding, the

best available talent in the market -- are not an equivalent for

the one great disadvantage of an inferior interest in the result.



    It must be remembered, besides, that even if a government

were superior in intelligence and knowledge to any single

individual in the nation, it must be inferior to all the

individuals of the nation taken together. It can neither possess

in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a portion of the

acquirements and capacities which the country contains,

applicable to any given purpose. There must be many persons

equally qualified for the work with those whom the government

employs, even if it selects its instruments with no reference to

any consideration but their fitness. Now these are the very

persons into whose hands, in the cases of most common occurrence,

a system of individual agency naturally tends to throw the work,

because they are capable of doing it better or on cheaper terms

than any other persons. So far as this is the case, it is evident

that government, by excluding or even by superseding individual

agency, either substitutes a less qualified instrumentality for

one better qualified, or at any rate substitutes its own mode of

accomplishing the work, for all the variety of modes which would

be tried by a number of equally qualified persons aiming at the

same end; a competition by many degrees more propitious to the

progress of improvement, than any uniformity of system. 



    6. I have reserved for the last place one of the strongest of

the reasons against the extension of government agency, Even if

the government could comprehend within itself, in each

department, all the most eminent intellectual capacity and active

talent of the nation, it would not be the less desirable that the

conduct of a large portion of the affairs of the society should

be left in the hands of the persons immediately interested in

them. The business of life is an essential part of the practical

education of a people; without which, book and school

instruction, though most necessary and salutary, does not suffice

to qualify them for conduct, and for the adaptation of means to

ends. Instruction is only one of the desiderata of mental

improvement; another, almost as indispensable, is a vigorous

exercise of the active energies; labour, contrivance, judgment,

self-control: and the natural stimulus to these is the

difficulties of life. This doctrine is not to be confounded with

the complacent optimism, which represents the evils of life as

desirable things, because they call forth qualities adapted to

combat with evils. It is only because the difficulties exist,

that the qualities which combat with them are of any value. As

practical beings it is our business to free human life from as

many as possible of its difficulties, and not to keep up a stock

of them as hunters preserve game, for the exercise of pursuing

it. But since the need of active talent and practical judgment in

the affairs of life can only be diminished, and not, even on the

most favourable supposition, done away with, it is important that

those endowments should be cultivated not merely in a select few,

but in all, and that the cultivation should be more varied and

complete than most persons are able to find in the narrow sphere

of their merely individual interests. A people among whom there

is no habit of spontaneous action for a collective interest --

who look habitually to their government to command or prompt them

in all matters of joint concern -- who expect to have everything

done for them, except what can be made an affair of mere habit

and routine -- have their faculties only half developed; their

education is defective in one of its most important branches. 

    Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by

exercise, diffused through the whole community, in itself one of

the most valuable of national possessions: it is rendered, not

less, but more, necessary, when a high degree of that

indispensable culture is systematically kept up in the chiefs and

functionaries of the state. There cannot be a combination of

circumstances more dangerous to human welfare, than that in which

intelligence and talent are maintained at a high standard within

a governing corporation, but starved and discouraged outside the

pale. Such a system, more completely than any other, embodies the

idea of despotism, by arming with intellectual superiority as an

additional weapon, those who have already the legal power. It

approaches as nearly as the organic difference between human

beings and other animals admits, to the government of sheep by

their shepherd, without anything like so strong an interest as

the shepherd has in the thriving condition of the flock. The only

security against political slavery, is the check maintained over

governors, by the diffusion of intelligence, activity, and public

spirit among the governed. Experience proves the extreme

difficulty of permanently keeping up a sufficiently high standard

of those qualities; a difficulty which increases, as the advance

of civilization and security removes one after another of the

hardships, embarrassments, and dangers against which individuals

had formerly no resource but in their own strength, skill, and

courage. It is therefore of supreme importance that all classes

of the community, down to the lowest, should have much to do for

themselves; that as great a demand should be made upon their

intelligence and virtue as it is in any respect equal to; that

the government should not only leave as far as possible to their

own faculties the conduct of whatever concerns themselves alone,

but should suffer them, or rather encourage them, to manage as

many as possible of their joint concerns by voluntary

co-operation; since this discussion and management of collective

interests is the great school of that public spirit, and the

great source of that intelligence of public affairs, which are

always regarded as the distinct. ive character of the public of

free countries. 

    A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic

institutions in detail, but confined to the central government,

not only is not political freedom, but often creates a spirit

precisely the reverse, carrying down to the lowest grade in

society the desire and ambition of political domination. In some

countries the desire of the people is for not being tyrannized

over, but in others it is merely for an equal chance to everybody

of tyrannizing. Unhappily this last state of the desires is fully

as natural to man. kind as the former, and in many of the

conditions even of civilized humanity, is far more largely

exemplified. In proportion as the people are accustomed to manage

their affairs by their own active intervention, instead of

leaving them to the government, their desires will turn to

repelling tyranny, rather than to tyrannizing: while in

proportion as all real initiative and direction resides in the

government, and individuals habitually feel and act as under its

perpetual tutelage, popular institutions develop in them not the

desire of freedom, but an unmeasured appetite for place and

power: diverting the intelligence and activity of the country

from its principal business, to a wretched competition for the

selfish prizes and the petty vanities of office. 



    7. The preceding are the principal reasons, of a general

character, in favour of restricting to the narrowest compass the

intervention of a public authority in the business of the

community: and few will dispute the more than sufficiency of

these reasons, to throw, in every instance, the burthen of making

out a strong case, not on those who resist, but on those who

recommend, government interference. Laisser-faire, in short,

should be the general practice: every departure from it, unless

required by some great good, is a certain evil. 

    The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases to which it

is most manifestly applicable, has heretofore been infringed by

governments, future ages will probably have difficulty in

crediting. Some idea may be formed of it from the description of

M. Dunoyer(3*) of the restraints imposed on the operations of

manufacture under the old government of France, by the meddling

and regulating spirit of legislation. 'La societe exercait sur la

fabrication la juridiction la plus illimitee et la plus

arbitraire: elle disposait sans scrupule des facultes des

fabricants; elle decidait qui pourrait travailler, quelle chose

on pourrait faire, quels materiaux on devrait employer, quels

procedes il faudrait suivre, quelles formes on donnerait aux

produits, etc. Il ne suffisait pas de faire bien, de faire mieux,

il fallait faire suivant les regles. Qui ne connait ce reglement

de 1670, qui prescrivait de saisir et de clouer au poteau, avec

le nom des auteurs, les marchandises non conformes aux regles

tracees, et qui, a la seconde recidive, voulait que les

fabricants y fussent attaches eux memes? Il ne s'agissait pas de

consulter le gout des consommateurs, mais de se conformer aux

volontes de la loi. Des legions d'inspecteurs, de commissaires,

de controleurs, de jures, de gardes, etainet charges de les faire

executer; on brisait les metiers, on brulait les produits qui n'y

etaient pas conformes: les ameliorations etaient punies; on

mettait les inventeurs a l'amende. On soumettait a des regles

differentes la fabrication des objets destines a la consommation

interieure et celle des produits destines au commerce etranger.

Un artisan n'etait pas le maitre de choisir le lieu de son

etablissement, ni de travailler en toute saison, ni de travailler

pour tout le monde. Il existe un decret du 30 Mars 1700, qui

borne a dix-huit villes le nombre des lieux ou l'on pourra faire

des bas au metier; un arret du 18 Juin 1723 enjoint aux

fabricants de Rouen de suspendre leurs travaux du 1er Juillet au

15 Septembre, affin de faciliter ceux de la recolte; Louis XIV,

quand il voulut entreprendre la colonnade du Louvre, defendit aux

particuliers d'employer des ouvriers sans sa permission, sous

peine de 10,000 livres d'amende, et aux ouvriers de travailler

pour les particuliers, sous peine, pour la premiere fois, de la

prison, et pour la seconde, des galeres.'

    That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter,

and that the officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged down

to the French Revolution, we have the testimony of Roland, the

Girondist minister.(4*) 'I have seen', says he, 'eighty, ninety,

a hundred pieces of cotton or woollen stuff cut up, and

completely destroyed. I have witnessed similar scenes every week

for a number of years. I have seen manufactured goods

confiscated; heavy fines laid on the manufacturers; some pieces

of fabric were burnt in public places, and at the hours of

market: others were fixed to the pillory, with the name of the

manufacturer inscribed upon them, and he himself was threatened

with the pillory, in case of a second offence. All this was done

under my eyes, at Rouen, in conformity with existing regulations,

or ministerial orders. What crime deserved so cruel a punishment?

Some defects in the materials employed, or in the texture of the

fabric, or even in some of the threads of the warp. 

    'I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band of

satellites who put all in confusion in their establishments,

spread terror in their families, cut the stuffs from the frames,

tore off the warp from the looms, and carried them away as proofs

of infringement; the manufacturers were summoned, tried, and

condemned: their goods confiscated; copies of their judgment of

confiscation posted up in every public place; fortune,

reputation, credit, all was lost and destroyed. And for what

offence? Because they had made of worsted, a kind of cloth called

shag, such as the English used to manufacture, and even sell in

France, while the French regulations stated that that kind of

cloth should be made with mohair. I have seen other manufacturers

treated in the same way, because they had made camlets of a

particular width, used in England and Germany, for which there

was a great demand from Spain, Portugal, and other countries, and

from several parts of France, while the French regulations

prescribed other widths for camlets.'

    The time is gone by, when such applications as these of the

principle of 'paternal government' would be attempted, in even

the least enlightened country of the European commonwealth of

nations. In such cases as those cited, all the general objections

to government interference are valid, and several of them in

nearly their highest degree. But we must now turn to the second

part of our task, and direct our attention to cases, in which

some of those general objections are altogether absent, while

those which can never be got rid of entirely, are overruled by

counter-considerations of still greater importance.

    We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of

life is better performed when those who have an immediate

interest in it are left to take their own course, uncontrolled

either by the mandate of the law or by the meddling of any public

functionary. The persons, or some of the persons, who do the

work, are likely to be better judges than the government, of the

means of attaining the particular end at which they aim. Were we

to suppose, what is not very probable, that the government has

possessed itself of the best knowledge which had been acquired up

to a given time by the persons most skilled in the occupation;

even then, the individual agents have so much stronger and more

direct an interest in the result, that the means are far more

likely to be improved and perfected if left to their uncontrolled

choice. But if the workman is generally the best selector of

means, can it be affirmed with the same universality, that the

consumer, or person served, is the most competent judge of the

end? Is the buyer always qualified to judge of the commodity? If

not, the presumption in favour of the competition of the market

does not apply to the case; and if the commodity be one, in the

quality of which society has much at stake, the balance of

advantages may be in favour of some mode and degree of

intervention, by the authorized representatives of the collective

interest of the state. 



    8. Now, the proposition that the consumer is a competent

judge of the commodity, can be admitted only with numerous

abatements and exceptions. He is generally the best judge (though

even this is not true universally) of the material objects

produced for his use. These are destined to supply some physical

want, or gratify some taste or inclination, respecting which

wants or inclinations there is no appeal from the person who

feels them; or they are the means and appliances of some

occupation, for the use of the persons engaged in it, who may be

presumed to be judges of the things required in their own

habitual employment. But there are other things, of the worth of

which the demand of the market is by no means a test; things of

which the utility does not consist in ministering to

inclinations, nor in serving the daily uses of life, and the want

of which is least felt where the need is greatest. This is

peculiarly true of those things which are chiefly useful as

tending to raise the character of human beings. The uncultivated

cannot be competent judges of cultivation. Those who most need to

be made wiser and better, usually desire it least, and if they

desired it, would be incapable of finding the way to it by their

own lights. It will continually happen, on the voluntary system,

that the end not being desired, the means will not be provided at

all, or that, the persons requiring improvement having an

imperfect or altogether erroneous conception of what they want,

the supply called forth by the demand of the market will be

anything but what is really required. Now any well-intentioned

and tolerably civilized government may think, without

presumption, that it does or ought to possess a degree of

cultivation above the average of the community which it rules,

and that it should therefore be capable of offering better

education and better instruction to the people, than the greater

number of them would spontaneously demand. Education, therefore,

is one of those things which it is admissible in principle that a

government should provide for the people. The case is one to

which the reasons of the non.interference principle do not

necessarily or universally extend.(5*)

    With regard to elementary education, the exception to

ordinary rules may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still

further. There are certain primary elements and means of

knowledge, which it is in the highest degree desirable that all

human beings born into the community should acquire during

childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they depend, have

the power of obtaining for them this instruction, and fail to do

it, they commit a double breach of duty, towards the children

themselves, and towards the members of the community generally,

who are all liable to suffer seriously from the Consequences of

ignorance and want of education in their fellow-citizens. It is

therefore an allowable exercise of the powers of government, to

impose on parents the legal obligation of giving elementary

instruction to children. This, however, cannot fairly be done,

without taking measures to insure that such instruction shall be

always accessible to them, either gratuitously or at a trifling

expense. 

    It may indeed be objected that the education of children is

one of those expenses which parents, even of the labouring class,

ought to defray; that it is desirable that they should feel it

incumbent on them to provide by their own means for the

fulfilment of their duties, and that by giving education at the

cost of others, just as much by giving subsistence, the standard

of necessary wages is proportionally lowered, and the springs of

exertion and self-restraint is so much relaxed. This argument

could, at best, be only valid if the question were that of

substituting a public provision for what individuals would

otherwise do for themselves; if all parents in the labouring

class recognized and practised the duty of giving instruction to

their children at their own expense. But inasmuch as parents do

not practise this duty, and do not include education among those

necessary expenses which their wages must provide for, therefore

the general rate of wages is not high enough to bear those

expenses, and they must be borne from some other source. And this

is not one of the cases in which the tender of help perpetuates

the state of things which renders help necessary. Instruction,

when it is really such, does not enervate, but strengthens as

well as enlarges the active faculties: in whatever manner

acquired, its effect on the mind is favourable to the spirit of

independence: and when, unless had gratuitously, it would not be

had at all, help in this form has the opposite tendency to that

which in so many other cases makes it objectionable; it is help

towards doing without help. 

    In England, and most European countries, elementary

instruction cannot be paid for, at its full cost, from the common

wages of unskilled labour, and would not if it could. The

alternative, therefore, is not between government and private

speculation, but between a government provision and voluntary

charity: between interference by government, and interference by

associations of individuals, subscribing their own money for the

purpose, like the two great School Societies. It is, of course,

not desirable that anything should be done by funds derived from

compulsory taxation, which is already sufficiently well done by

individual liberality. How far this is the case with school

instruction, is, in each particular instance, a question of fact.

The education provided in this country on the voluntary principle

has of late been so much discussed, that it is needless in this

place to criticize it minutely, and I shall merely express my

conviction, that even in quantity it is, and is likely to remain,

altogether insufficient, while in quality, though with some

slight tendency to improvement, it is never good except by some

rare accident, and generally so bad as to be little more than

nominal. I hold it therefore the duty of the government to supply

the defect, by giving pecuniary support to elementary schools,

such as to render them accessible to all the children of the

poor, either freely, or for a payment too inconsiderable to be

sensibly felt. 

    One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the

government must claim no monopoly for its education, either in

the lower or in the higher branches; must exert neither authority

nor influence to induce the people to resort to its teachers in

preference to others, and must confer no peculiar advantages on

those who have been instructed by them. Though the government

teachers will probably be superior to the average of private

instructors, they will not embody all the knowledge and sagacity

to be found in all instructors taken together, and it is

desirable to leave open as many roads as possible to the desired

end. It is not endurable that a government should, either de jure

or de facto, have a complete control over the education of the

people. To possess such a control, and actually exert it, is to

be despotic. A government which can mould the opinions and

sentiments of the people from their youth upwards, can do with

them whatever it pleases. Though a government, therefore, may,

and in many cases ought to, establish schools and colleges, it

must neither compel nor bribe any person to come to them; nor

ought the power of individuals to set up rival establishments, to

depend in any degree upon its authorization. It would be

justified in requiring from all the people that they shall

possess instruction in certain things, but not in prescribing to

them how or from whom they shall obtain it. 



    9. In the matter of education, the intervention of government

is justifiable, because the case is not one in which the interest

and judgment of the consumer are a sufficient security for the

goodness of the commodity. Let us now consider another class of

cases, where there is no person in the situation of a consumer,

and where the interest and judgment to be relied on are those of

the agent himself; as in the conduct of any business in which he

is exclusively interested, or in entering into any contract or

engagement by which he himself is to be bound. 

    The ground of the practical principle of non-interference

must here be, that most persons take a juster and more

intelligent view of their own interest, and of the means of

promoting it, than can either be prescribed to them by a general

enactment of the legislature, or pointed out in the particular

case by a public functionary. The maxim is unquestionably sound

as a general rule; but there is no difficulty in perceiving some

very large and conspicuous exceptions to it. These may be classed

under several heads. 

    First: -- The individual who is presumed to be the best judge

of his own interests may be incapable of judging or acting for

himself; may be a lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or though not

wholly incapable, may be of immature years and judgment. In this

case the foundation of the laisser.faire principle breaks down

entirely. The person most interested is not the best judge of the

matter, nor a competent judge at all. Insane persons are

everywhere regarded as proper objects of the care of the

state.(6*) In the case of children and young persons, it is

common to say, that though they cannot judge for themselves, they

have their parents or other relatives to judge for them. But this

removes the question into a different category; making it no

longer a question whether the government should interfere with

individuals in the direction of their own conduct and interests,

but whether it should leave absolutely in their power the conduct

and interests of somebody else. Parental power is as susceptible

of abuse as any other power, and is, as a matter of fact,

constantly abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing parents

from brutally ill-treating, and even from murdering their

children, far less ought it to be presumed that the interests of

children will never be sacrificed, in more commonplace and less

revolting ways, to the selfishness or the ignorance of their

parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that parents ought to do

or forbear for the interest of children, the law is warranted, if

it is able, in compelling to be done or forborne, and is

generally bound to do so. To take an example from the peculiar

province of political economy; it is right that children, and

young persons not yet arrived at maturity, should be protected so

far as the eye and hand of the state can reach, from being

over-worked. Labouring for too many hours in the day, or on work

beyond their strength, should not be permitted to them, for if

permitted it may always be compelled. Freedom, of contract, in

the case of children, is but another word for freedom of

coercion. Education also, the best which circumstances admit of

their receiving, is not a thing which parents or relatives, from

indifference, jealousy, or avarice, should have it in their power

to withhold. 

    The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children,

apply not less strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves

and victims of the most brutal part of mankind, the lower

animals. It is by the grossest misunderstanding of the principles

of liberty, that the infliction of exemplary punishment on

ruffianism practised towards these defenceless creatures, has

been treated as a meddling by government with things beyond its

province; an interference with domestic life. The domestic life

of domestic tyrants is one of the things which it is the most

imperative on the law to interfere with; and it is to be

regretted that metaphysical scruples respecting the nature and

source of the authority of government, should induce many warm

supporters of laws against cruelty to animals, to seek for a

justification of such laws in the incidental consequences of the

indulgence of ferocious habits to the interests of human beings,

rather than in the intrinsic merits of the case itself. What it

would be the duty of a human being, possessed of the requisite

physical strength, to prevent by force if attempted in his

presence, it cannot be less incumbent on society generally to

repress. The existing laws of England on the subject are chiefly

defective in the trifling, often almost nominal, maximum, to

which the penalty even in the worst cases is limited. 

    Among those members of the community whose freedom of

contract ought to be controlled by the legislature for their own

protection, on account (it is said) of their dependent position,

it is frequently proposed to include women: and in the existing

Factory Acts, their labour, in common with that of young persons,

has been placed under peculiar restrictions. But the classing

together, for this and other purposes, of women and children,

appears to me both indefensible in principle and mischievous in

practice. Children below a certain age cannot judge or act for

themselves; up to a considerably greater age they are inevitably

more or less disqualified for doing so; but women are as capable

as men of appreciating and managing their own concerns, and the

only hindrance to their doing so arises from the injustice of

their present social position. When the law makes everything

which the wife acquires, the property of the husband, while by

compelling her to live with him it forces her to submit to almost

any amount of moral and even physical tyranny which he may chose

to inflict, there is some ground for regarding every act done by

her as done under coercion: but it is the great error of

reformers and philanthropists in our time, to nibble at the

consequences of unjust power, instead of redressing the injustice

itself. If women had as absolute a control as men have, over

their own persons and their own patrimony or acquisitions, there

would be no plea for limiting their hours of labouring for

themselves, in order that they might have time to labour for the

husband, in what is called, by the advocates of restriction, his

home. Women employed in factories are the only women in the

labour. ing rank of life whose position is not that of slaves and

drudges; precisely because they cannot easily be compelled to

work and earn wages in factories against their will. For

improving the condition of women, it should, in the contrary, be

an object to give them the readiest access to independent

industrial employment, instead of closing, either entirely or

partially, that which is already open to them. 



    10. A second exception to the doctrine that individuals are

the best judges of their own interest, is when an individual

attempts to decide irrevocably now, what will be best for his

interest at some future and distant time. The presumption in

favour of individual judgment is only legitimate, where the

judgment is grounded on actual, and especially on present,

personal experience; not where it is formed antecedently to

experience, and not suffered to be reversed even after experience

has condemned it. When persons have bound themselves by a

contract, not simply to do some one thing, but to continue doing

something for ever or for a prolonged period, without any power

of revoking the engagement, the presumption which their

perseverance in that course of conduct would otherwise raise in

favour of its being advantageous to them, does not exist; and any

such presumption which can be grounded on their having

voluntarily entered into the contract, perhaps at an early age,

and without any real knowledge of what they undertook, is

commonly next to null. The practical maxim of leaving contracts

free, is not applicable without great limitations in case of

engagement in perpetuity; and the law should be extremely jealous

of such engagements; should refuse its sanction to them, when the

obligations they impose are such as the contracting party cannot

be a competent judge of; if it ever does sanction them, it should

take every possible security for their being contracted with

foresight and deliberation; and in compensation for not

permitting the parties themselves to revoke their engagement,

should grant them a release from it, on a sufficient case being

made out before an impartial authority. These considerations are

eminently applicable to marriage, the most important of all cases

of engagement for life. 



    11. The third exception which I shall notice, to the doctrine

that government cannot manage the affairs of individuals as well

as the individuals themselves, has reference to the great class

of cases in which the individuals can only manage the concern by

delegated agency, and in which the so-called private management

is, in point of fact, hardly better entitled to be called

management by the persons interested, than administration by a

public officer. Whatever, if left to spontaneous agency, can only

be done by joint-stock associations, will often be as well, and

sometimes better done, as far as the actual work is concerned, by

the state. Government management is, indeed, proverbially

jobbing, careless, and ineffective, but so likewise has generally

been joint-stock management. The directors of a joint.stock

company, it is true, are always shareholders; but also the

members of a government are invariably taxpayers; and in the case

of directors, no more than in that of governments, is their

proportional share of the benefits of good management, equal to

the interest they may possibly have in mismanagement, even

without reckoning the interest of their case. It may be objected,

that the shareholders, in their collective character, exercise a

certain control over the directors, and have almost always full

power to remove them from office. Practically, however, the

difficulty of exercising this power is found to be so great, that

it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of such flagrantly

unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful management, as would

generally produce the ejection from office of managers appointed

by the government. Against the very ineffectual security afforded

by meetings of shareholders, and by their individual inspection

and inquiries, may be placed the greater publicity and more

active discussion and comment, to be expected in free countries

with regard to affairs in which the general government takes

part. The defects, therefore, of government management, do not

seem to be necessarily much greater, if necessarily greater at

all, than those of management by joint-stock. 

    The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary

associations all such things as they are competent to perform,

would exist in equal strength if it were certain that the work

itself would be as well or better done by public officers. These

reasons have been already pointed out: the mischief of

overloading the chief functionaries of government with demands on

their attention, and diverting them from duties which they alone

can discharge, to objects which can be sufficiently well attained

without them; the danger of unnecessarily swelling the direct

power and in. direct influence of government, and multiplying

occasions of collision between its agents and private citizens;

and the inexpediency of concentrating in a dominant bureaucracy,

all the skill and experience in the management of large

interests, and all the power of organized action, existing in the

community; a practice which keeps the citizens in a relation to

the government like that of children to their guardians, and is a

main cause of the inferior capacity for political life which has

hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the

Continent, whether with or without the forms of representative

government.(7*) But although, for these reasons, most things

which are likely to be even tolerably done by voluntary

associations, should, generally speaking, be left to them; it

does not follow that the manner in which those associations

perform their work should be entirely uncontrolled by the

government. There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever

nature, by which a service is performed, is certain, from the

nature of the case, to be virtually single; in which a practical

monopoly, with all the power it confers of taxing the community,

cannot be prevented from existing. I have already more than once

adverted to the case of the gas and water companies, among which,

though perfect freedom is allowed to competition, none really

takes place, and practically they are found to be even more

irresponsible, and unapproachable by individual complaints, than

the government. There are the expenses without the advantages of

plurality of agency; and the charge made for services which

cannot be dispensed with, is, in substance, quite as much

compulsory taxation as if imposed by law; there are few

householders who make any distinction between their 'water rate'

and other local taxes. In the case of these particular services,

the reasons preponderate in favour of their being performed, like

the paving and cleansing of the streets, not certainly by the

general government of the state, but by the municipal authorities

of the town, and the expense defrayed, as even now it in fact is,

by a local rate. But in the many analogous cases which it is best

to resign to voluntary agency, the community needs some other

security for the fit performance of the service than the interest

of the managers; and it is the part of the government, either to

subject the business to reasonable conditions for the general

advantage, or to retain such power over it, that the profits of

the monopoly may at least be obtained for the public. This

applies in the case of a road, a canal, or a railway. These are

always, in a great degree, practical monopolies; and a government

which concedes such monopoly unreservedly to a private company,

does much the same thing as if it allowed an individual or an

association to levy any tax they chose, for their own benefit, on

all the malt produced in the country, or on all the cotton

imported into it. To make the concession for a limited time is

generally justifiable, on the principle which justifies patents

for invention: but the state should either reserve to itself a

reversionary property in such public works, or should retain, and

freely exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares and

charges, and, from time to time, varying that maximum. It is

perhaps necessary to remark, that the state may be the proprietor

of canals or railways without itself working them; and that they

will almost always be better worked by means of a company,

renting the railway or canal for a limited period from the state.





    12. To a fourth case of exception I must request particular

attention, it being one to which as it appears to me, the

attention of political economists has not yet been sufficiently

drawn. There are matters in which the interference of law is

required, not to overrule the judgment of individuals respecting

their own interest, but to give effect to that judgment: they

being unable to give effect to it except by concert, which

concert again cannot be effectual unless it receives validity and

sanction from the law. For illustration, and without prejudging

the particular point, I may advert to the question of diminishing

the hours of labour. Let us suppose, what is at least supposable,

whether it be the fact or not -- that a general reduction of the

hours of factory labour, say from ten to nine, would be for the

advantage of the workpeople: that they would receive as high

wages, or nearly as high, for nine hours. labour as they receive

for ten. If this would be the result, and if the operatives

generally are convinced that it would, the limitation, some may

say, will be adopted spontaneously. I answer, that it will not be

adopted unless the body of operatives bind themselves to one

another to abide by it. A workman who refused to work more than

nine hours while there were others who worked ten, would either

not be employed at all, or if employed, must submit to lose

one-tenth of his wages. However convinced, therefore, he may be

that it is the interest of the class to work short time, it is

contrary to his own interest to set the example, unless he is

well assured that all or most others will follow it. But suppose

a general agreement of the whole class: might not this be

effectual without the sanction of law? Not unless enforced by

opinion with a rigour practically equal to that of law. For

however beneficial the observance of the regulation might be to

the class collectively, the immediate interest of every

individual would lie in violating it: and the more numerous those

were who adhered to the rule, the more would individuals gain by

departing from it. If nearly all restricted themselves to nine

hours, those who chose to work for ten would gain all the

advantages of the restriction, together with the profit from

infringing it; they would get ten hours' wages for nine hours'

work, and an hour's wages besides. I grant that if a large

majority adhered to the nine hours, there would be no harm done;

the benefit would be, in the main, secured to the class, while

those individuals who preferred to work harder and earn more,

would have an opportunity of doing so. This certainly would be

the state of things to be wished, for; and assuming that a

reduction of hours without any diminution of wages could take

place without expelling the commodity from some of its markets --

which is in every particular instance a question of fact, not of

principle -- the manner in which it would be most desirable that

this effect should be brought about, would be by a quiet change

in the general custom of the trade; short hours becoming, by

spontaneous choice, the general practice, but those who chose to

deviate from it having the fullest liberty to do so. Probably,

however, so many would prefer the ten hours' work on the improved

terms, that the limitation could not be maintained as a general

practice: what some did from choice, others would soon be obliged

to do from necessity, and those who had chosen long hours for the

sake of increased wages, would be forced in the end to work long

hours for no greater wages than before. Assuming then that it

really would be the interest of each to work only nine hours if

he could be assured that all others would do the same, there

might be no means of attaining this object but by converting

their supposed mutual agreement into an engagement under penalty,

by consenting to have it enforced by law. I am not expressing any

opinion in favour of such an enactment, which has never in this

country been demanded, and which I certainly should not, in

present circumstances, recommend: but it serves to exemplify the

manner in which classes of persons may need the assistance of

law, to give effect to their deliberate collective opinion of

their own interest, by affording to every individual a guarantee

that his competitors will pursue the same course, without which

he cannot safely adopt it himself. 

    Another exemplification of the same principle is afforded by

what is known as the Wakefield system of colonization. This

system is grounded on the important principle, that the degree of

productiveness of land and labour depends on their being in a due

proportion to one another; that if a few persons in a

newly-settled country attempt to occupy and appropriate a large

district, or if each labourer becomes too soon an occupier and

cultivator of land, there is a loss of productive power, and a

great retardation of the progress of the colony in wealth and

civilization: that nevertheless the instinct (as it may almost be

called) of appropriation, and the feelings associated in old

countries with landed proprietorship, induce almost every

emigrant to take possession of as much land as he has the means

of acquiring, and every labourer to become at once a proprietor,

cultivating his own land with no other aid than that of his

family. If this propensity to the immediate possession of land

could be in some degree restrained, and each labourer induced to

work a certain number of years on hire before he became a landed

proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired labourers could be

maintained, available for roads, canals, works of irrigation,

&c., and for the establishment and carrying on of the different

branches of town industry; whereby the labourer, when he did at

last become a landed proprietor, would find his land much more

valuable, through access to markets, and facility of obtaining

hired labour. Mr Wakefield therefore proposed to check the

premature occupation of land, and dispersion of the people, by

putting upon all unappropriated lands a rather high price, the

proceeds of which were to be expended in conveying emigrant

labourers from the mother country. 

    This salutary provision, however, has been objected to, in

the name and on the authority of what was represented as the

great principle of political economy, that individuals are the

best judges of their own interest. It was said, that when things

are left to themselves, land is appropriated and occupied by the

spontaneous choice of individuals, in the quantities and at the

times most advantageous to each person, and therefore to the

community generally; and that to interpose artificial obstacles

to their obtaining land, is to prevent them from adopting the

course which in their own judgment is most beneficial to them,

from a self.conceited notion of the legislator, that he knows

what is most for their interest, better than they do themselves.

Now this is a complete misunderstanding, either of the system

itself, or of the principle with which it is alleged to conflict.

The oversight is similar to that which we have just seen

exemplified on the subject of hours of labour. However beneficial

it might be to the colony in the aggregate, and to each

individual composing it, that no one should occupy more land than

he can properly cultivate, nor become a proprietor until there

are other labourers ready to take his place in working for hire;

it can never be the interest of an individual to exercise this

forbearance, unless he is assured that others will do so too.

Surrounded by settlers who have each their thousand acres, how is

he benefited by restricting himself to fifty? or what does a

labourer gain by deferring the acquisition altogether for a few

years, if all other labourers rush to convert their first

earnings into estates in the wilderness, several miles apart from

one another? If they, by seizing on land, prevent the formation

of a class of labourers for wages, he will not, by postponing the

time of his becoming a proprietor, be enabled to employ the land

with any greater advantage when he does obtain it; to what end

therefore should he place himself in what will appear to him and

others a position of inferiority, by remaining a hired labourer,

when all around him are proprietors? It is the interest of each

to do what is good for all, but only if others will do likewise. 

    The principle that each is the best judge of his own

interest, understood as these objectors understand it, would

prove that governments ought not to fulfil any of their

acknowledged duties -- ought not, in fact, to exist at all. It is

greatly the interest of the community, collectively and

individually, not to rob or defraud one another. but there is not

the less necessity for laws to punish robbery and fraud; because,

though it is the interest of each that nobody should rob or

cheat, it is not any one's interest to refrain from robbing and

cheating others when all others are permitted to rob and cheat

him. Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for this reason -- because

even an unanimous opinion that a certain line of conduct is for

the general interest, does not always make it people's individual

interest to adhere to that line of conduct. 



    13. Fifthly; the argument against government interference

grounded on the maxim that individuals are the best judges of

their own interest, cannot apply to the very large class of

cases, in which those acts of individuals with which the

government claims to interfere, are not done by those individuals

for their own interest, but for the interest of other people.

This includes, among other things, the important and much

agitated subject of public charity. Though individuals should, in

general, be left to do for themselves whatever it can reasonably

be expected that they should be capable of doing, yet when they

are at any rate not to be left to themselves, but to be helped by

other people, the question arises whether it is better that they

should receive this help exclusively from individuals, and

therefore uncertainly and casually, or by systematic

arrangements, in which society acts through its organ, the state.



    This brings us to the subject of Poor Laws; a subject which

would be of very minor importance if the habits of all classes of

the people were temperate and prudent, and the diffusion of

property satisfactory; but of the greatest moment in a state of

things so much the reverse of this, in both points, as that which

the British islands present. 

    Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting the

foundation of morals or of the social union, it will be admitted

to be right that human beings should help one another; and the

more so, in proportion to the urgency of the need: and none needs

help so urgently as one who is starving. The claim to help,

therefore, created by destitution, is one of the strongest which

can exist; and there is prima facie the amplest reason for making

the relief of so extreme an exigency as certain to those who

require it, as by any arrangements of society it can be made.

    On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two

sets of consequences to be considered; the consequences of the

assistance, and the consequences of relying on the assistance.

The former are generally beneficial, but the latter, for the most

part, injurious; so much so, in many cases, as greatly to

outweigh the value of the benefit. And this is never more likely

to happen than in the very cases where the need of help is the

most intense. There are few things for which it is more

mischievous that people should rely on the habitual aid of

others, than for the means of subsistence, and unhappily there is

no lesson which they more easily learn. The problem to be solved

is therefore one of peculiar nicety as well as importance; how to

give the greatest amount of needful help, with the smallest

encouragement to undue reliance on it. 

    Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be

impaired by the absence of help, as well as by its excess. It is

even more fatal to exertion to have no hope of succeeding by it,

than to be assured of succeeding without it. When the condition

of any one is so disastrous that his energies are paralysed by

discouragement, assistance is a tonic, not a sedative: it braces

instead of deadening the active faculties: always provided that

the assistance is not such as to dispense with self-help, by

substituting itself for the person's own labour, skill, and

prudence, but is limited to affording him a better hope of

attaining success by those legitimate means. This accordingly is

a test to which all plans of philanthropy and benevolence should

be brought, whether intended for the benefit of individuals or of

classes, and whether conducted on the voluntary or on the

government principle.

    In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine or

maxim, it would appear to be this -- that if assistance is given

in such a manner that the condition of the person helped is as

desirable as that of the person who succeeds in doing the same

thing without help, the assistance, if capable of being

previously calculated on, is mischievous: but if, while available

to every. body, it leaves to every one a strong motive to do

without it if he can, it is then for the most part beneficial.

This principle, applied to a system of public charity, is that of

the Poor Law of 1834. If the condition of a person receiving

relief is made as eligible as that of the labourer who supports

himself by his own exertions, the system strikes at the root of

all individual industry and self-government; and, if fully acted

up to, would require as its supplement an organized system of

compulsion, for governing and setting to work like cattle, those

who had been removed from the influence of the motives that act

on human beings. But if, consistently with guaranteeing all

persons against absolute want, the condition of those who are

supported by legal charity can be kept considerably less

desirable than the condition of those who find support for

themselves, none but beneficial consequences can arise from a law

which renders it impossible for any person, except by his own

choice, to die from insufficiency of food. That in England at

least this supposition can be realized, is proved by the

experience of a long period preceding the close of the last

century, as well as by that of many highly pauperized districts

in more recent times, which have been dispauperized by adopting

strict rules of poor-law administration, to the great and

permanent benefit of the whole labouring class. There is probably

no country in which, by varying the means suitably to the

character of the people, a legal provision for the destitute

might not be made compatible with the observance of the

conditions necessary to its being innocuous.

    Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly

desirable, that the certainty of subsistence should be held out

by law to the destitute able-bodied, rather than that their

relief should depend on voluntary charity. In the first place,

charity almost always does too much or too little: it lavishes

its bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve in another.

Secondly, since the state must necessarily provide subsistence

for the criminal poor while undergoing punishment, not to do the

same for the poor who have not offended is to give a premium on

crime. And lastly, if the poor are left to individual charity, a

vast amount of mendacity is inevitable. What the state may and

should abandon to private charity, is the task of distinguishing

between one case of real necessity and another. Private charity

can give more to the more deserving. The state must act by

general rules. It cannot undertake to discriminate between the

deserving and the undeserving indigent. It owes no more than

subsistence to the first, and can give no less to the last. What

is said about the injustice of a law which has no better

treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than for the

ill-conducted, is founded on a misconception of the province of

law and public authority. The dispensers of public relief have no

business to be inquisitors. Guardians and overseers are not fit

to be trusted to give or withhold other people's money according

to their verdict on the morality of the person soliciting it; and

it would show much ignorance of the ways of mankind to suppose

that such persons, even in the almost impossible case of their

being qualified, will take the trouble of ascertaining and

sifting the past conduct of a person in distress, so as to form a

rational judgment on it. Private charity can make these

distinctions; and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do

so according to its own judgment. It should understand that this

is its peculiar and appropriate province, and that it is

commendable or the contrary, as it exercises the function with

more or less discernment. But the administrators of a public fund

ought not to be required to do more for anybody, than that

minimum which is due even to the worst. If they are, the

indulgence very speedily becomes the rule, and refusal the more

or less capricious or tyrannical exception. 



    14. Another class of cases which fall within the same general

principle as the case of public charity, are those in which the

acts done by individuals, though intended solely for their own

benefit, involve consequences extending indefinitely beyond them,

to interests of the nation or of posterity, for which society in

its collective capacity is alone able, and alone bound, to

provide. One of these cases is that of Colonization. If it is

desirable, as no one will deny it to be, that the planting of

colonies should be conducted, not with an exclusive view to the

private interests of the first founders, but with a deliberate

regard to the permanent welfare of the nations afterwards to

arise from these small beginnings; such regard can only be

secured by placing the enterprise, from its commencement, under

regulations constructed with the foresight and enlarged views of

philosophical legislators; and the government alone has power

either to frame such regulations, or to enforce their observance.



    The question of government intervention in the work of

Colonization involves the future and permanent interests of

civilization itself, and far outstretches the comparatively

narrow limits of purely economical considerations. But even with

a view to those considerations alone, the removal of population

from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts of the earth's

surface is one of those works of eminent social usefulness, which

most require, and which at the same time best repay, the

intervention of government. 

    To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be

considered in its relation, not to a single country, but to the

collective economical interests of the human race. The question

is in general treated too exclusively as one of distribution; of

relieving one labour market and supplying another. It is this,

but it is also a question of production, and of the most

efficient employment of the productive resources of the world.

Much has been said of the good economy of importing commodities

from the place where they can be bought cheapest; while the good

economy of producing them where they can be produced cheapest, is

comparatively little thought of. If to carry consumable goods

from the places where they are superabundant to those where they

are scarce, is a good pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally

good speculation to do the same thing with regard to labour and

instruments? The exportation of labourers and capital from old to

new countries, from a place where their productive power is less,

to a place where it is greater, increases by so much the

aggregate produce of the labour and capital of the world. It adds

to the joint wealth of the old and the new country, what amounts

in a short period to many times the mere cost of effecting the

transport. There needs be no hesitation in affirming that

Colonization, in the present state of the world, is the best

affair of business, in which the capital of an old and wealthy

country can engage. 

    It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a great

scale can be undertaken, as an affair of business, only by the

government, or by some combination of individuals in complete

understanding with the government; except under such very

peculiar circumstances as those which succeeded the Irish famine.

Emigration on the voluntary principle rarely has any material

influence in lightening the pressure of population in the old

country, though as far as it goes it is doubtless a benefit to

the colony. Those labouring persons who voluntarily emigrate are

seldom the very poor; they are small farmers with some little

capital, or labourers who have saved something, and who, in

removing only their own labour from the crowded labour market,

withdraw from the capital of the country a fund which maintained

and employed more labourers than themselves. Besides, this

portion of the community is so limited in number, that it might

be removed entirely, without making any sensible impression upon

the numbers of the population, or even upon the annual increase.

Any considerable emigration of labour is only practicable, when

its cost is defrayed, or at least advanced, by others than the

emigrants themselves. Who then is to advance it? Naturally, it

may be said, the capitalists of the colony, who require the

labour, and who intend to employ it. But to this there is the

obstacle, that a capitalist, after going to the expense of

carrying out labourers, has no security that he shall be the

person to derive any benefit from them. If all the capitalists of

the colony were to combine, and bear the expense by subscription,

they would still have no security that the labourers, when there,

would continue to work for them. After working for a short time

and earning a few pounds, they always, unless prevented by the

government, squat on unoccupied land, and work only for

themselves. The experiment has been repeatedly tried whether it

was possible to enforce contracts for labour, or the repayment of

the passage money of emigrants to those who advanced it, and the

trouble and expense have always exceeded the advantage. The only

other resource is the voluntary contributions of parishes or

individuals, to rid themselves of surplus labourers who are

already, or who are likely to become, locally chargeable on the

poor.rate. Were this speculation to become general, it might

produce a sufficient amount of emigration to clear off the

existing unemployed population, but not to raise the wages of the

employed: and the same thing would require to be done over again

in less than another generation. 

    One of the principal reasons why Colonization should be a

national undertaking, is that in this manner alone, save in

highly exceptional cases, can emigration be self-supporting. The

exportation of capital and labour to a new country being, as

before observed, one of the best of all affairs of business, it

is absurd that it should not, like other affairs of business,

repay its own expenses. Of the great addition which it makes to

the produce of the world, there can be no reason why a sufficient

portion should not be intercepted, and employed in reimbursing

the outlay incurred in effecting it. For reasons already given,

no individual, or body of individuals, can reimburse themselves

for the expense; the government, however, can. It can take from

the annual increase of wealth, caused by the emigration, the

fraction which suffices to repay with interest what the

emigration has cost. The expenses of emigration to a colony ought

to be borne by the colony; and this, in general, is only possible

when they are borne by the colonial government. 

    Of the modes in which a fund for the support of colonization

can be raised in the colony, none is comparable in advantage to

that which was first suggested, and so ably and perseveringly

advocated, by Mr Wakefield: the plan of putting a price on all

unoccupied land, and devoting the proceeds to emigration. The

unfounded and pedantic objections to this plan have been answered

in a former part of this chapter: we have now to speak of its

advantages. First, it avoids the difficulties and discontents

incident to raising a large annual amount by taxation; a thing

which is almost useless to attempt with a scattered population of

settlers in the wilderness, who, as experience proves, can seldom

be compelled to pay direct taxes, except at a cost exceeding

their amount; while in an infant community indirect taxation soon

reaches its limit. The sale of lands is thus by far the easiest

mode of raising the requisite funds. But it has other and still

greater recommendations. It is a beneficial check upon the

tendency of a population of colonists to adopt the tastes and

inclinations of savage life, and to disperse so widely as to lose

all the advantages of commerce, of markets, of separation of

employments, and combination of labour. By making it necessary

for those who emigrate at the expense of the fund, to earn a

considerable sum before they can become landed proprietors, it

keeps up a perpetual succession of labourers for hire, who in

every country are a most important auxiliary even to peasant

proprietors: and by diminishing the eagerness of agricultural

speculators to add to their domain, it keeps the settlers within

reach of each other for purposes of co-operation, arranges a

numerous body of them within easy distance of each centre of

foreign commerce and non-agricultural industry, and insures the

formation and rapid growth of towns and town products. This

concentration, compared with the dispersion which uniformly

occurs when unoccupied land can be had for nothing, greatly

accelerates the attainment of prosperity, and enlarges the fund

which may be drawn upon for further emigration. Before the

adoption of the Wakefield system, the early years of all new

colonies were full of hardship and difficulty: the last colony

founded on the old principle, the Swan River settlement, being

one of the most characteristic instances. In all subsequent

colonization, the Wakefield principle has been acted upon, though

imperfectly, a part only of the proceeds of the sale of land

being devoted to emigration: yet wherever it has been introduced

at all, as in South Australia, Victoria, and New Zealand, the

restraint put upon the dispersion of the settlers, and the influx

of capital caused by the assurance of being able to obtain hired

labour, has, in spite of many difficulties and much

mismanagement, produced a suddenness and rapidity of prosperity

more like fable than reality.(8*)

    The self-supporting system of Colonization, once established,

would increase in efficiency every year; its effect would tend to

increase in geometrical progression: for since every able-bodied

emigrant, until the country is fully peopled, adds in a very

short time to its wealth, over and above his own consumption, as

much as would defray the expense of bringing out another

emigrant, it follows that the greater the number already sent,

the greater number might continue to be sent, each emigrant

laying the foundation of a succession of other emigrants at short

intervals without fresh expense, until the colony is filled up.

It would therefore be worth while, to the mother country, to

accelerate the early stages of this progression, by loans to the

colonies for the purpose of emigration, repayable from the fund

formed by the sales of land. In thus advancing the means of

accomplishing a large immediate emigration, it would be investing

that amount of capital in the mode, of all others, most

beneficial to the colony; and the labour and savings of these

emigrants would hasten the period at which a large sum would be

available from sales of land. It would be necessary, in order not

to overstock the labour market, to act in concert with the

persons disposed to remove their own capital to the colony. The

knowledge that a large amount of hired labour would be available,

in so productive a field of employment, would insure a large

emigration of capital from a country, like England, of low

profits and rapid accumulation: and it would only be necessary

not to send out a greater number of labourers at one time, than

this capital could absorb and employ at high wages.

    Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expenditure,

once incurred, would provide not merely a single emigration, but

a perpetually flowing stream of emigrants, which would increase

in breadth and depth as it flowed on; this mode of relieving

overpopulation has a recommendation, not possessed by any other

plan ever proposed for making head against the consequences of

increase without restraining the increase itself: there is an

element of indefiniteness in it; no one can perfectly foresee how

far its influence, as a vent for surplus population, might

possibly reach. There is hence the strongest obligation on the

government of a country like our own, with a crowded population,

and unoccupied continents under its command, to build, as it

were, and keep open, in concert with the colonial governments, a

bridge from the mother country to those continents, by

establishing the self-supporting system of colonization on such a

scale, that as great an amount of emigration as the colonies can

at the time accommodate, may at all times be able to take place

without cost to the emigrants themselves. 

    The importance of these considerations, as regards the

British islands, has been of late considerably diminished by the

unparalleled amount of spontaneous emigration from Ireland; an

emigration not solely of small farmers, but of the poorest class

of agricultural labourers, and which is at once voluntary and

self-supporting, the succession of emigrants being kept up by

funds contributed from the earnings of their relatives and

connexions who had gone before. To this has been added a large

amount of voluntary emigration to the seats of the gold

discoveries, which has partly supplied the wants of our most

distant colonies, where, both for local and national interests,

it was most of all required. But the stream of both these

emigrations has already considerably slackened, and though that

from Ireland has since partially revived, it is not certain that

the aid of government in a systematic form, and on the

self-supporting principle, will not again become necessary to

keep the communication open between the hands needing work in

England, and the work which needs hands elsewhere. 



    15. The same principle which points out colonization, and the

relief of the indigent, as cases to which the principal objection

to government interference does not apply, extends also to a

variety of cases, in which important public services are to be

performed, while yet there is no individual specially interested

in performing them, nor would any adequate remuneration naturally

or spontaneously attend their performance. Take for instance a

voyage of geographical or scientific exploration. The information

sought may be of great public value, yet no individual would

derive any benefit from it which would repay the expense of

fitting out the expedition; and there is no mode of intercepting

the benefit on its way to those who profit by it, in order to

levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such voyages

are, or might be, undertaken by private subscription; but this is

a rare and precarious resource. Instances are more frequent in

which the expense has been borne by public companies or

philanthropic associations; but in general such enterprises have

been conducted at the expense of government, which is thus

enabled to entrust them to the persons in its judgment best

qualified for the task. Again, it is a proper office of

government to build and maintain lighthouses, establish buoys,

&c. for the security of navigation: for since it is impossible

that the ships at sea which are benefited by a lighthouse, should

be made to pay a toll on the occasion of its use, no one would

build lighthouses from motives of personal interest, unless

indemnified and rewarded from a compulsory levy made by the

state. There are many scientific researches, of great value to a

nation and to mankind, requiring assiduous devotion of time and

labour, and not unfrequently great expense, by persons who can

obtain a high price for their services in other ways. If the

government had no power to grant indemnity for expense, and

remuneration for time and labour thus employed, such researches

could only be undertaken by the very few persons who, with an

independent fortune, unite technical knowledge, laborious habits,

and either great public spirit, or an ardent desire of scientific

celebrity. 

    Connected with this subject is the question of providing, by

means of endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has

been called a learned class. The cultivation of speculative

knowledge, though one of the most useful of all employments, is a

service rendered to a community collectively, not individually,

and one consequently for which it is, prima facie, reasonable

that the community collectively should pay; since it gives no

claim on any individual for a pecuniary remuneration; and unless

a provision is made for such services from some public fund,

there is not only no encouragement to them, but there is as much

discouragement as is implied in the impossibility of gaining a

living by such pursuits, and the necessity consequently imposed

on most of those who would be capable of them, to employ the

greatest part of their time in gaining a subsistence. The evil,

however, is greater in appearance than in reality. The greatest

things, it has been said, have generally been done by those who

had the least time at their disposal; and the occupation of some

hours every day in a routine employment, has often been found

compatible with the most brilliant achievements in literature and

philosophy. Yet there are investigations and experiments which

require not only a long but a continuous devotion of time and

attention: there are also occupations which so engross and

fatigue the mental faculties, as to be inconsistent with any

vigorous employment of them upon other subjects, even in any

intervals of leisure. It is highly desirable, therefore, that

there should be a mode of insuring to the public the services of

scientific discoverers, and perhaps of some other classes of

savants, by affording them the means of support consistently with

devoting a sufficient portion of time to their peculiar pursuits.

The fellowships of the Universities are an institution

excellently adapted for such a purpose; but are hardly ever

applied to it, being bestowed, at the best, as a reward for past

proficiency, in committing to memory what has been done by

others, and not as the salary of future labours in the

advancement of knowledge. In some countries, Academies of

science, antiquities, history, &c., have been formed, with

emoluments annexed. The most effectual plan, and at the same time

least liable to abuse, seems to be that of conferring

Professorships, with duties of instruction attached to them. The

occupation of teaching a branch of knowledge, at least in its

higher departments, is a help rather than an impediment to the

systematic cultivation of the subject itself. The duties of a

professorship almost always leave much time for original

researches; and the greatest advances which have been made in the

various sciences, both moral and physical, have originated with

those who were public teachers of them; from Plato and Aristotle

to the great names of the Scotch, French, and German

Universities. I do not mention the English, because until very

lately their professorships have been, as is well known, little

more than nominal. In the case, too, of a lecturer in a great

institution of education, the public at large has the means of

judging, if not the quality of the teaching, at least the talents

and industry of the teacher; and it is more difficult to

misemploy the power of appointment to such an office, than to job

in pensions and salaries to persons not so directly before the

public eye. 

    It may be said generally, that anything which it is desirable

should be done for the general interests of mankind or of future

generations, or for the present interests of those members of the

community who require external aid but which is not of a nature

to remunerate individuals or associations for undertaking it, is

in itself a suitable thing to be undertaken by government:

though, before making the work their own, governments ought

always to consider if there be any rational probability of its

being done on what is called the voluntary principle, and if so,

whether it is likely to be done in a better or more effectual

manner by government agency, than by the zeal and liberality of

individuals.



    16. The preceding heads comprise, to the best of my judgment,

the whole of the exceptions to the practical maxim, that the

business of society can be best performed by private and

voluntary agency. It is, however, necessary to add, that the

intervention of government cannot always practically stop short

at the limit which defines the cases intrinsically suitable for

it. In the particular circumstances of a given age or nation,

there is scarcely anything really important to the general

interest, which it may not be desirable, or even necessary, that

the government should take upon itself, not because private

individuals cannot effectually perform it, but because they will

not. At some times and places, there will be no roads, docks,

harbours, canals, works of irrigation, hospitals, schools,

colleges, printing-presses, unless the government establishes

them; the public being either too poor to command the necessary

resources, or too little advanced in intelligence to appreciate

the ends, or not sufficiently practised in joint action to be

capable of the means. This is true, more or less, of all

countries inured to despotism, and particularly of those in which

there is a very wide distance in civilization between the people

and the government: as in those which have been conquered and are

retained in subjection by a more energetic and more cultivated

people. In many parts of the world, the people can do nothing for

themselves which requires large means and combined action: all

such things are left undone, unless done by the state. In these

cases, the mode in which the government can most surely

demonstrate the sincerity with which it intends the greatest good

of its subjects, is by doing the things which are made incumbent

on it by the helplessness of the public, in such a manner as

shall tend not to increase and perpetuate, but to correct, that

helplessness. A good government will give all its aid in such a

shape, as to encourage and nurture any rudiments it may find of a

spirit of individual exertion. It will be assiduous in removing

obstacles and discouragements to voluntary enterprise, and in

giving whatever facilities and whatever direction and guidance

may be necessary: its pecuniary means will be applied, when

practicable, in aid of private efforts rather than in

supersession of them, and it will call into play its machinery of

rewards and honours to elicit such efforts. Government aid, when

given merely in default of private enterprise, should be so given

as to be as far as possible a course of education for the people

in the art of accomplishing great objects by individual energy

and voluntary co-operation.

    I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part

of the functions of government which all admit to be

indispensable, the function of prohibiting and punishing such

conduct on the part of individuals in the exercise of their

freedom, as is clearly injurious to other persons, whether the

case be one of force, fraud, or negligence. Even in the best

state which society has yet reached, it is lamentable to think

how great a proportion of all the efforts and talents in the

world are employed in merely neutralizing one another. It is the

proper end of government to reduce this wretched waste to the

smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as shall cause

the energies now spent by mankind in injuring one another, or in

protecting themselves against injury, to be turned to the

legitimate employment of the human faculties, that of compelling

the powers of nature to be more and more subservient to physical

and moral good. 



NOTES:



1. Supra, Bk, v, Ch. I.



2. The only cases in which government agency involves nothing of

a compulsory nature, are the rare cases in which, without any

artificial monopoly, it pays its own expenses. A bridge built

with public money, on which tolls are collected sufficient to pay

not only all current expenses, but the interest of the original

outlay, is one case in point. The government railways in Belgium

and Germany are another example. The Post Office, if its monopoly

were abolished, and it still paid its expenses, would be another.





3. De la Liberte du Travail, Vol. II, pp. 353-4.



4. I quote at second hand, from Mr Carey's Essay on the Rate of

Wages, pp. 195-6. 



5. In opposition to these opinions, a writer, with whom on many

points I agree, but whose hostility to government intervention

seems to me too indiscriminate and unqualified, M. Dunoyer,

observes, that instruction, however good in itself, can only be

useful to the public in so far as they are willing to receive it,

and that the best proof that the instruction is suitable to their

wants is its success as a pecuniary enterprise. This argument

seems no more conclusive respecting instruction for the mind,

than it would be respecting medicine for the body. No medicine

will do the patient any good if he cannot be induced to take it;

but we are not bound to admit as a corollary from this, that the

patient will select the right medicine without assistance. Is it

not probable that a recommendation, from any quarter which he

respects, may induce him to accept a better medicine than he

would spontaneously have chosen? This is, in respect to

education, the very point in debate. Without doubt, instruction

which is so far in advance of the people that they cannot be

induced to avail themselves of it, is to them of no more worth

than if it did not exist. But between what they spontaneously

choose, and what they will refuse to accept when offered, there

is a breadth of interval proportioned to their deference for the

recommender. Besides, a thing of which the public are bad judges,

may require to be shown to them and pressed on their attention

for a long time, and to prove its advantages by long experience,

before they learn to appreciate it, yet they may learn at last;

which they might never have done, if the thing had not been thus

obtruded upon them in act, but only recommended in theory. Now, a

pecuniary speculation cannot wait years, or perhaps generations

for success; it must succeed rapidly, or not at all. Another

consideration which M. Dunoyer seems to have overlooked, is, that

institutions and modes of tuition which never could be made

sufficiently popular to repay, with a profit, the expenses

incurred on them, may be invaluable to the many by giving the

highest quality of education to the few and keeping up the

perpetual succession of superior minds, by whom knowledge is

advanced, and the community urged forward in civilization. 



6. The practice of the English law with respect to insane

persons, especially on the all-important point of the

ascertainment of insanity, most urgently demands reform. At

present no persons, whose property is worth coveting, and whose

nearest relations are unscrupulous, or on bad terms with them,

are secure against a commission of lunacy. At the instance of the

persons who would profit by their being declared insane, a jury

may be impanelled and an investigation held at the expense of the

property, in which all their personal peculiarities, with all the

additions made by the lying gossip of low servants, are poured

into the credulous ears of twelve petty shopkeepers, ignorant of

all ways of life except those of their own class, and regarding

every trait of individuality in character or taste as

eccentricity, and all eccentricity as either insanity or

wickedness. lf this sapient tribunal gives the desired verdict,

the property is handed over to perhaps the last persons whom the

rightful owner would have desired or suffered to possess it. Some

recent instances of this kind of investigation have been a

scandal to the administration of justice. Whatever other changes

in this branch of law may be made, two at least are imperative:

firSt, that, as in other legal proceedings, the expenses should

not be borne by the person on trial, but by the promoters of the

inquiry, subject to recovery of costs in case of success: and

secondly, that the property of a person declared insane, should

in no case be made over to heirs while the proprietor is alive,

but should be managed by a public officer until his death or

recovery. 



7. A parallel case may be found in the distaste for politics, and

absence of public spirit, by which women, as a class, are

characterized in the present state of society, and which is often

felt and complained of by political reformers, without, in

general, making them willing to recognise, or desirous to remove,

its cause. It obviously arises from their being taught, both by

institutions and by the whole of their education, to regard

themselves as entirely apart from politics. Wherever they have

been politicians, they have shown as great interest in the

subject, and as great aptitude for it, according to the spirit of

their time, as the men with whom they were contemporaries: in

that period of history (for example) in which Isabella of Castile

and Elizabeth of England were, not rare exceptions, but merely

brilliant examples of a spirit and capacity very largely diffused

among women of high station and cultivation in Europe. 



8. The objections which have been made, with so much virulence,

in some of these colonies, to the Wakefield system, apply, in so

far as they have any validity, not to the principle, but to some

provisions which are no part of the system, and have been most

unnecessarily and improperly engrafted on it; such as the

offering only a limited quantity of land for sale, and that by

auction, and in lots of not less than 640 acres, instead of

selling all land which is asked for, and allowing to the buyer

unlimited freedom of choice, both as to quantity and situation,

at a fixed price. 





End