


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 5



Chapter 9



The Same Subject Continued



    1. Having spoken thus far of the effects produced by the

excellences or defects of the general system of the law, I shall

now touch upon those resulting from the special character of

parts of it. As a selection must be made, I shall confine myself

to a few leading topics. The portions of the civil law of a

country which are of most importance economically (next to those

which determine the status of the labourer, as slave, serf, or

free), are those relating to the two subjects of Inheritance and

Contract. Of the laws relating to contract, none are more

important economically, than the laws of partnership, and those

of insolvency. It happens that on all these three points, there

is just ground for condemning some of the provisions of the

English law. 

    With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early chapter,

considered the general principles of the subject, and suggested

what appear to me to be, putting all prejudices apart, the best

dispositions which the law could adopt. Freedom of bequest as the

general rule, but limited by two things: first, that if there are

descendants, who, being unable to provide for themselves, would

become burthensome to the state, the equivalent of whatever the

state would accord to them should be reserved from the property

for their benefit: and secondly, that no one person should be

permitted to acquire, by inheritance, more than the amount of a

moderate independence. In case of intestacy, the whole property

to escheat to the state: which should be bound to make a just and

reasonable provision for descendants, that is, such a provision

as the parent or ancestor ought to have made, their

circumstances, capacities, and mode of bringing up being

considered. 

    The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several

phases of improvement to go through, before ideas so far removed

from present modes of thinking will be taken into serious

consideration: and as, among the recognized modes of determining

the succession to property, some must be better and others worse,

it is necessary to consider which of them deserves the

preference. As an intermediate course, therefore, I would

recommend the extension to all property, of the present English

law of inheritance affecting personal property (freedom of

bequest, and in case of intestacy, equal division): except that

no rights should be acknowledged in collaterals, and that the

property of those who have neither descendants nor ascendants,

and make no will, should escheat to the state. 

    The laws of existing nations deviate from these maims in two

opposite ways. In England, and in most of the countries where the

influence of feudality is still felt in the laws, one of the

objects aimed at in respect to land and other immoveable

property, is to keep it together in large masses: accordingly, in

cases of intestacy, it passes, generally speaking (for the local

custom of a few places is different), exclusively to the eldest

son. And though the rule of primogeniture is not binding on

testators, who in England have nominally the power of bequeathing

their property as they please, any proprietor may so exercise

this power as to deprive his immediate successor of it, by

entailing the property on one particular line of his descendants:

which, besides preventing it from passing by inheritance in any

other than the prescribed manner, is attended with the incidental

consequence of precluding it from being sold; since each

successive possessor, having only a life interest in the

property, cannot alienate it for a longer period than his own

life. In some other countries, such as France, the law, on the

contrary, compels division of inheritances; not only, in case of

intestacy, sharing the property, both real and personal, equally

among all the children, or (if there are no children) among all

relatives in the same degree of propinquity; but also not

recognizing any power of bequest, or recognizing it over only a

limited portion of the property, the remainder being subjected to

compulsory equal division. 

    Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced, or is

perhaps maintained, in the countries where it exists, from any

general considerations of justice, or any foresight of economical

consequences, but chiefly from political motives; in the one case

to keep up large hereditary fortunes, and a landed aristocracy;

in the other, to break these down, and prevent their

resurrection. The first object, as an aim of national policy, I

conceive to be eminently undesirable: with regard to the second,

I have pointed out what seems to me a better mode of attaining

it. The merit, or demerit, however, of either purpose, belongs to

the general science of politics, not to the limited department of

that science which is here treated of. Each of the two systems is

a real and efficient instrument for the purpose intended by it;

but each, as it appears to me, achieves that purpose at the cost

of much mischief. 



    2. There are two arguments of an economical character, which

are urged in favour of primogeniture. One is, the stimulus

applied to the industry and ambition of younger children, by

leaving them to be the architects of their own fortunes. This

argument was put by Dr Johnson in a manner more forcible than

complimentary to an hereditary aristocracy, when he said, by way

of recommendation of primogeniture, that it 'makes but one fool

in a family'. It is curious that a defender of aristocratic

institutions should be the person to assert that to inherit such

a fortune as takes away any necessity for exertion, is generally

fatal to activity and strength of mind: in the present state of

education, however, the proposition, with some allowance for

exaggeration, may be admitted to be true. But whatever force

there is in the argument, counts in favour of limiting the

eldest, as well as all the other children, to a mere provision,

and dispensing with even the 'one fool' whom Dr Johnson was

willing to tolerate. If unearned riches are so pernicious to the

character, one does not see why, in order to withhold the poison

from the junior members of a family, there should be no way but

to unite all their separate potions, and administer them in the

largest possible dose to one selected victim. It cannot be

necessary to inflict this great evil on the eldest son, for want

of knowing what else to do with a large fortune. 

    Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primogeniture

in stimulating industry, as depending, not so much on the poverty

of the younger children, as on the contrast between that poverty

and the riches of the elder; thinking it indispensable to the

activity and energy of the hive, that there should be a huge

drone here and there, to impress the working bees with a due

sense of the advantages of honey. 'Their inferiority in point of

wealth', says Mr M'Culloch, speaking of the younger children,

'and their desire to escape from this lower station, and to

attain to the same level with their elder brothers, inspires them

with an energy and vigour they could not otherwise feel. But the

advantage of preserving large estates from being frittered down

by a scheme of equal division, is not limited to its influence

over the younger children of their owners. It raises universally

the standard of competence, and gives new force to the springs

which set industry in motion. The manner of living among the

great landlords is that in which every one is ambitious of being

able to indulge; and their habits of expense, though sometimes

injurious to themselves, act as powerful incentives to the

ingenuity and enterprise of the other classes, who never think

their fortunes sufficiently ample, unless they will enable them

to emulate the splendour of the richest landlords; so that the

custom of primogeniture seems to render all classes more

industrious, and to augment at the same time, the mass of wealth

and the scale of enjoyment.(1*)

    The portion of truth, I can hardly say contained in these

observations, but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a

state of complete equality of fortunes would not be favourable to

active exertion for the increase of wealth. Speaking of the mass,

it is as true of wealth as of most other distinctions -- of

talent, knowledge, virtue -- that those who already have, or

think they have, as much of it as their neighbours, will seldom

exert themselves to acquire more. But it is not therefore

necessary that society should provide a set of persons with large

fortunes, to fulfil the social duty of standing to be looked at,

with envy and admiration, by the aspiring poor. The fortunes

which people have acquired for themselves, answer the purpose

quite as well, indeed much better; since a person is more

powerfully stimulated by the example of somebody who has earned a

fortune, than by the mere sight of somebody who possesses one;

and the former is necessarily an example of prudence and

frugality as well as industry, while the latter much oftener sets

an example of profuse expense, which spreads, with pernicious

effect, to the very class on whom the sight of riches is supposed

to have so beneficial an influence, namely, those whose weakness

of mind, and taste for ostentation, makes 'the splendour of the

richest landlords' at. tract them with the most potent spell. In

America there are few or no hereditary fortunes; yet industrial

energy, and the ardour of accumulation, are not supposed to be

particularly backward in that part of the world. When a country

has once fairly entered into the industrial career, which is the

principal occupation of the modern, as war was that of the

ancient and medieval world, the desire of acquisition by industry

needs no factitious stimulus: the advantages naturally inherent

in riches, and the character they assume of a test by which

talent and success in life are habitually measured, are an ample

security for their being pursued with sufficient intensity and

zeal. As to the deeper consideration, that the diffusion of

wealth, and not its concentration, is desirable, and that the

more wholesome state of society is not that in which immense

fortunes are possessed by a few and coveted by all, but that in

which the greatest possible numbers possess and are contented

with a moderate competency, which all may hope to acquire; I

refer to it in this place, only to show, how widely separated, on

social questions, is the entire mode of thought of the defenders

of primogeniture, from that which is partially promulgated in the

present treatise. 

    The other economical argument in favour of primogeniture, has

special reference to landed property. It is contended that the

habit of dividing inheritances equally, or with an approach to

equality, among children, promotes the subdivision of land into

portions too small to admit of being cultivated in an

advantageous manner. This argument, eternally reproduced, has

again and again been refuted by English and Continental writers.

It proceeds on a supposition entirely at variance with that on

which all the theorems of political economy are grounded. It

assumes that mankind in general will habitually act in a manner

opposed to their immediate and obvious pecuniary interest. For

the division of the inheritance does not necessarily imply

division of the land; which may be held in common, as is not

unfrequently the case in France and Belgium; or may become the

property of one of the coheirs, being charged with the shares of

the others by way of mortgage; or they may sell it outright, and

divide the proceeds. When the division of the land would diminish

its productive power, it is the direct interest of the heirs to

adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing, however, what

the argument assumes, that either from legal difficulties or from

their own stupidity and barbarism, they would not, if left to

themselves, obey the dictates of this obvious interest, but would

insist upon cutting up the land bodily into equal parcels, with

the effect of impoverishing themselves; this would be an

objection to a law such as exists in France, of compulsory

division, but can be no reason why testators should be

discouraged from exercising the right of bequest in general

conformity to the rule of equality, since it would always be in

their power to provide that the division of the inheritance

should take place without dividing the land itself. That the

attempts of the advocates of primogeniture to make out a case by

facts against the custom of equal division, are equally abortive,

has been shown in a former place. In all countries, or parts of

countries, in which the division of inheritances is accompanied

by small holdings, it is because small holdings are the general

system of the country, even on the estates of the great

proprietors. 

    Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for

primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the general

principles of justice; being a broad distinction in the treatment

of one person and of another, grounded solely on an accident.

There is no need, therefore, to make out any case of economical

evil against primogeniture. Such a case, however, and a very

strong one, may be made. It is a natural effect of primogeniture

to make the landlords a needy class. The object of the

institution, or custom, is to keep the land together in large

masses, and this it commonly accomplishes; but the legal

proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily bona fide owner

of the whole income which it yields. It is usually charged, in

each generation, with provisions for the other children. It is

often charged still more heavily by the imprudent expenditure of

the proprietor. Great landowners are generally improvident in

their expenses; they live up to their incomes when at the

highest, and if any change of circumstances diminishes their

resources, some time elapses before they make up their minds to

retrench. Spendthrifts in other classes are ruined, and disappear

from society; but the spendthrift landlord usually holds fast to

his land, even when he has become a mere receiver of its rents

for the benefit of creditors. The same desire to keep up the

'splendour' of the family, which gives rise to the custom of

primogeniture, indisposes the owner to sell a part in order to

set free the remainder; their apparent are therefore habitually

greater than their real means, and they are under a perpetual

temptation to proportion their expenditure to the former rather

than to the latter. From such causes as these, in almost all

countries of great landowners, the majority of landed estates are

deeply mortgaged; and instead of having capital to spare for

improvements, it requires all the increased value of land, caused

by the rapid increase of the wealth and population of the

country, to preserve the class from being impoverished. 



    3. To avert this impoverishment, recourse was had to the

contrivance of entails, whereby the order of succession was

irrevocably fixed, and each holder, having only a life interest,

was unable to burthen his successor. The land thus passing, free

from debt, into the possession of the heir, the family could not

be ruined by the improvidence of its existing representative. The

economical evils arising from this disposition of property were

partly of the same kind, partly different, but on the whole

greater, than those arising from primogeniture alone. The

possessor could not now ruin his successors, but he could still

ruin himself: he was not at all more likely than in the former

case to have the means necessary for improving the property:

while, even if he had, he was still less likely to employ them

for that purpose, when the benefit was to accrue to a person whom

the entail made independent of him, while he had probably younger

children to provide for, in whose favour he could not now charge

the estate. While thus disabled from being himself an improver,

neither could he sell the estate to somebody who would; since

entail precludes alienation. In general he has even been unable

to grant leases beyond the term of his own life; 'for', says

Blackstone, 'if such leases had been valid, then, under cover of

long leases, the issue might have been virtually disinherited';

and it has been necessary in Great Britain to relax, by statute,

the rigour of entails, in order to allow either of long leases,

or of the execution of improvements at the expense of the estate.

It may be added that the heir of entail, being assured of

succeeding to the family property, however undeserving of it, and

being aware of this from his earliest years, has much more than

the ordinary chances of growing up idle, dissipated, and

profligate. 

    In England, the power of entail is more limited by law, than

in Scotland and in most other countries where it exists. A

landowner can settle his property upon any number of persons

successively who are living at the time, and upon one unborn

person, on whose attaining the age of twenty-one, the entail

expires, and the land becomes his absolute property. An estate

may in this manner be transmitted through a son, or a son and

grandson, living when the deed is executed, to an unborn child of

that grandson. It has been maintained that this power of entail

is not sufficiently extensive to do any mischief: in truth,

however, it is much larger than it seems. Entails very rarely

expire; the first heir of entail, when of age, joins with the

existing possessor in resettling the estate, so as to prolong the

entail for a further term. Large properties, therefore, are

rarely free for any considerable period, From the restraints of a

strict settlement; though the mischief is in one respect

mitigated, since in the renewal of the settlement for one more

generation, the estate is usually charged with a provision for

younger children. 

    In an economical point of view, the best system of landed

property is that in which land is most completely an object of

commerce; passing readily from hand to hand when a buyer can be

found to whom it is worth while to offer a greater sum for the

land, than the value of the income drawn from it by its existing

possessor. This of course is not meant of ornamental property,

which is a source of expense, not profit; but only of land

employed for industrial uses, and held for the sake of the income

which it affords. Whatever facilitates the sale of land, tends to

make it a more productive instrument of the community at large;

whatever prevents or restricts its sale, subtracts from its

usefulness. Now, not only has entail this effect, but primo.

geniture also. The desire to keep land together in large masses,

from other motives than that of promoting its productiveness,

often prevents changes and alienations which would increase its

efficiency as an instrument. 



    4. On the other hand, a law which, like the French, restricts

the power of bequest to a narrow compass, and compels the equal

division of the whole or the greater part of the property among

the children, seems to me, though on different grounds, also very

seriously objectionable. The only reason for recognizing in the

children any claim at all to more than a provision, sufficient to

launch them in life, and enable them to find a livelihood, is

grounded on the expressed or presumed wish of the parent; whose

claim to dispose of what is actually his own, cannot be set aside

by any pretensions of others to receive what is not theirs. To

control the rightful owner's liberty of gift, by creating in the

children a legal right superior to it, is to postpone a real

claim to an imaginary one. To this great and paramount objection

to the law, numerous secondary ones may be added. Desirable as it

is that the parent should treat the children with impartiality,

and not make an eldest son or a favourite, impartial division is

not alway synonymous with equal division. Some of the children

may, without fault of their own, be less capable than others of

providing for themselves: some may, by other means than their own

exertions, be already provided for: and impartiality may

therefore require that the rule observed should not be one of

equality, but of compensation. Even when equality is the object,

there are sometimes better means of attaining it, than the

inflexible rules by which law must necessarily proceed. If one of

the coheirs, being of a quarrelsome or litigious disposition,

stands upon his utmost rights, the law cannot make equitable

adjustments; it cannot apportion the property as seems best for

the collect.ive interest of all concerned; if there are several

parcels of land, and the heirs cannot agree about their value,

the law cannot give a parcel to each, but every separate parcel

must be either put up to sale or divided: if there is a

residence, or a park or pleasure.ground, which would be

destroyed, as such, by subdivision, it must be sold, perhaps at a

great sacrifice both of money and of feeling. But what the law

could not do, the parent could. By means of the liberty of be.

quest, all these points might be determined according to reason

and the general interest of the persons concerned; and the spirit

of the principle of equal division might be the better observed,

because the testator was emancipated from its letter. Finally, it

would not then be necessary, as under the compulsory system it

is, that the law should interfere authoritatively in the concerns

of individuals, not only on the occurrence of a death, but

throughout life, in order to guard against the attempts of

parents to frustrate the legal claims of their heirs, under

colour of gifts and other alienations inter vivos. 

    In conclusion; all owners of property should, I conceive,

have power to dispose by will of every part of it, but not to

determine the person who should succeed to it after the death of

all who were living when the will was made. Under what

restrictions it should be allowable to bequeath property to one

person for life, with remainder to another person already in

existence, is a question belonging to general legislation, not to

political economy. Such settlements would be no greater hindrance

to alienation than any case of joint ownership, since the consent

of persons actually in existence is all that would be necessary

for any new arrangement respecting the property. 



    5. From the subject of Inheritance I now pass to that of

Contracts, and among these, to the important subject of the Laws

of Partnership. How much of good or evil depends upon these laws,

and how important it is that they should be the best possible, is

evident to all who recognize in the extension of the cooperative

principle in the larger sense of the term, the great economical

necessity of modern industry. The progress of the productive arts

requiring that many sorts of industrial occupation should be

carried on by larger and larger capitals, the productive power of

industry must suffer by whatever impedes the formation of large

capitals through the aggregation of smaller ones. Capitals of the

requisite magnitude belonging to single owners, do not, in most

countries, exist in the needful abundance, and would be still

less numerous if the laws favoured the diffusion instead of the

concentration of property: while it is most undesirable that all

those improved processes, and those means of efficiency and

economy in production, which depend on the possession of large

funds, should be monopolies in the hands of a few rich

individuals, through the difficulties experienced by persons of

moderate or small means in associating their capital. Finally, I

must repeat my conviction, that the industrial economy which

divides society absolutely into two portions, the payers of wages

and the receivers of them, the first counted by thousands and the

last by millions, is neither fit for, nor capable of, indefinite

duration: and the possibility of changing this system for one of

combination without dependence, and unity of interest instead of

organized hostility, depends altogether upon the future

developments of the Partnership principle. 

    Yet there is scarcely any country whose laws do not throw

great, and in most cases, intentional obstacles in the way of the

formation of any numerous partnership. In England it is already a

serious discouragement, that differences among partners are,

practically speaking, only capable of adjudication by the Court

of Chancery: which is often worse than placing such questions out

of the pale of all law; since any one of the disputant parties,

who is either dishonest or litigious, can involve the others at

his pleasure in the expense, trouble, and anxiety, which are the

unavoidable accompaniments of a Chancery suit, without their

having the power of freeing themselves from the infliction even

by breaking up the association.(2*) Besides this, it required,

until lately, a separate Act of the legislature before any

joint-stock association could legally constitute itself, and be

empowered to act as one body. By a statute passed a few years

ago, this necessity is done away; but the statute in question is

described by competent authorities as a 'mass of confusion,' of

which they say that there 'never was such an infliction' on

persons entering into partnership.(3*) When a number of persons,

whether few or many, freely desire to unite their funds for a

common undertaking, not asking any peculiar privilege, nor the

power to dispossess any one of property, the law can have no good

reason for throwing difficulties in the way of the realization of

the project. On compliance with a few simple conditions of

publicity, any body of persons ought to have the power of

constituting themselves into a joint-stock company, or societe en

nom collectif, without asking leave either of any public officer

or of parliament. As an association of many partners must

practically be under the management of a few, every facility

ought to be afforded to the body for exercising the necessary

control and check over those few, whether they be themselves

members of the association, or merely its hired servants: and in

this point the English system is still at a lamentable distance

from the standard of perfection. 



    6. Whatever facilities, however, English law might give to

associations formed on the principles of ordinary partnership,

there is one sort of joint-stock association which until the year

1855 it absolutely disallowed, and which could only be called

into existence by a special act either of the legislature or of

the Crown. I mean, associations with limited liability. 

    Associations with limited liability are of two kinds: in one,

the liability of all the partners is limited, in the other that

of some of them only. The first is the societe anonyme of the

French law, which in England had until lately no other name than

that of 'chartered company': meaning thereby a joint-stock

company whose shareholders, by a charter from the Crown or a

special enactment of the legislature, stood exempted from any

liability for the debts of the concern, beyond the amount of

their subscriptions. The other species of limited partnership is

that known to the French law under the name of commandite; of

this, which in England is still unrecognized and illegal, I shall

speak presently. 

    If a number of persons chose to associate for carrying on any

operation of commerce or industry, agreeing among themselves and

announcing to those with whom they deal that the members of the

association do not undertake to be responsible beyond the amount

of the subscribed capital; is there any reason that the law

should raise objections to this proceeding, and should impose on

them the unlimited responsibility which they disclaim? For whose

sake? Not for that of the partners themselves; for it is they

whom the limitation of responsibility benefits and protects. It

must therefore be for the sake of third parties; namely, those

who may have transactions with the association, and to whom it

may run in debt beyond what the subscribed capital suffices to

pay. But nobody is obliged to deal with the association: still

less is any one obliged to give it unlimited credit. The class of

persons with whom such associations have dealings are in general

perfectly capable of taking care of themselves, and there seems

no reason that the law should be more careful of their interests

than they will themselves be; provided no false representation is

held out, and they are aware from the first what they have to

trust to. The law is warranted in requiring from all joint-stock

associations with limited responsibility, not only that the

amount of capital on which they profess to carry on business

should either be actually paid up or security given for it (if,

indeed, with complete publicity, such a requirement would be

necessary), but also that such accounts should be kept,

accessible to individuals, and if needful, published to the

world, as shall render it possible to ascertain at any time the

existing state of the company's affairs, and to learn whether the

capital which is the sole security for the engagements into which

they enter, still subsists unimpaired: the fidelity of such

accounts being guarded by sufficient penalties. When the law has

thus afforded to individuals all practicable means of knowing the

circumstances which ought to enter into their prudential

calculations in dealing with the company, there seems no more

need for interfering with individual judgment in this sort of

transactions, than in any other part of the private business of

life. 

    The reason usually urged for such interference is, that the

managers of an association with limited responsibility, not

risking their whole fortunes in the event of loss, while in case

of gain they might profit largely, are not sufficiently

interested in exercising due circumspection, and are under the

temptation of exposing the funds of the association to improper

hazards. It is, however, well ascertained that associations with

unlimited responsibility, if they have rich shareholders, can

obtain, even when known to be reckless in their transactions,

improper credit to an extent far exceeding what would be given to

companies equally ill-conducted whose creditors had only the

subscribed capital to rely on.(4*) To whichever side the balance

of evil inclines, it is a consideration of more importance to the

shareholders themselves than to third parties; since, with proper

securities for publicity, the capital of an association with

limited liability could not be engaged in hazards beyond those

ordinarily incident to the business it carries on, without the

facts being known, and becoming the subject of comments by which

the credit of the body would be likely to be affected in quite as

great a degree as the circumstances would justify. If, under

securities for publicity, it were found in practice that

companies, formed on the principle of unlimited responsibility,

were more skilfully and more cautiously managed, companies with

limited liability would be unable to maintain an equal

competition with them; and would therefore rarely be formed,

unless when such limitation was the only condition on which the

necessary amount of capital could be raised: and in that case it

would be very unreasonable to say that their formation ought to

be prevented. It may further be remarked, that although, with

equality of capital, a company of limited liability offers a

somewhat less security to those who deal with it, than one in

which every shareholder is responsible with his whole fortune,

yet even the weaker of these two securities is in some respects

stronger than that which an individual capitalist can afford. In

the case of an individual, there is such security as can be

founded on his unlimited liability, but not that derived from

publicity of transactions, or from a known and large amount of

paid-up capital. This topic is well treated in an able paper by

M. Coquelin, published in the Revue des Deux Mondes for July

1843.(5*)

    'While third parties who trade with individuals,' says this

writer, 'scarcely ever know, except by approximation, and even

that most vague and uncertain, what is the amount of capital

responsible for the performance of contracts made with them,

those who trade with a societe anonyme can obtain full

information if they seek it, and perform their operations with a

feeling of confidence that cannot exist in the other case. Again,

nothing is easier than for an individual trader to conceal the

extent of his engagements, as no one can know it certainly but

himself. Even his confidential clerk may be ignorant of it, as

the loans he finds himself compelled to make may not all be of a

character to require that they be entered in his day-book. It is

a secret confined to himself; one which transpires rarely, and

always slowly; one which is unveiled only when the catastrophe

has occurred. On the contrary, the societe anonyme neither can

nor ought to borrow, without the fact becoming known to all the

world directors, clerks, shareholders, and the public. Its

operations partake in some respects, of the nature of those of

governments. The light of day penetrates in every direction, and

there can be no secrets from those who seek for information. Thus

all is fixed, recorded, known, of the capital and debts in the

case of the societe anonyme, while all is uncertain and unknown

in the case of the individual trader. Which of the two, we would

ask the reader, presents the most favourable aspect, or the

surest guarantee, to the view of those who trade with them?

    'Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his

affairs are shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the

private trader is enabled, so long as his business appears

prosperous, to produce impressions in regard to his means far

exceeding the reality, and thus to establish a credit not

justified by those means. When losses occur, and he sees himself

threatened with bankruptcy, the world is still ignorant of his

condition, and he finds himself enabled to contract debts far

beyond the possibility of payment. The fatal day arrives, and the

creditors find a debt much greater than had been anticipated,

while the means of payment are as much less. Even this is not

all. The same obscurity which has served him so well thus far,

when desiring to magnify his capital and increase his credit, now

affords him the opportunity of placing a part of that capital

beyond the reach of his creditors. It becomes diminished, if not

annihilated. It hides itself, and not even legal remedies, nor

the activity of creditors, can bring it forth from the dark

corners in which it is placed.... Our readers can readily

determine for themselves if practices of this kind are equally

easy in the case of the societe anonyme. We do not doubt that

such things are possible, but we think that they will agree with

us that from its nature, its organization, and the necessary

publicity that attends all its actions, the liability to such

occurrences is very greatly diminished.'

    The laws of most countries, England included, have erred in a

twofold manner with regard to joint-stock companies. While they

have been most unreasonably jealous of allowing such associations

to exist, especially with limited responsibility, they have

generally neglected the enforcement of publicity; the best

security to the public against any danger which might arise from

this description of partnerships; and a security quite as much

required in the case of those associations of the kind in

question, which, by an exception from their general practice,

they suffered to exist. Even in the instance of the Bank of

England, which holds a monopoly from the legislature, and has had

partial control over a matter of so much public interest as the

state of the circulating medium, it is only within these few

years that any publicity has been enforced; and the publicity was

at first of an extremely incomplete character, though now, for

most practical purposes, probably at length sufficient. 



    7. The other kind of limited partnership which demands our

attention, is that in which the managing partner or partners are

responsible with their whole fortunes for the engagements of the

concern, but have others associated with them who contribute only

definite sums, and are not liable for anything beyond, though

they participate in the profits according to any rule which may

be agreed on. This is called partnership en commandite: and the

partners with limited liability (to whom, by the French law, all

interference in the management of the concern is interdicted) are

known by the name commanditaires. Such partnerships are not

allowed by English law: in all private partnerships, whoever

shares in the profits is liable for the debts, to as plenary an

extent as the managing partner. 

    For such prohibition no satisfactory defence has ever, so far

as I am aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason given

against limiting the responsibility of shareholders in a

joint-stock company does not apply here; there being no

diminution of the motives to circumspect management, since all

who take any part in the direction of the concern are liable with

their whole fortunes. To third parties again; the security is

improved by the existence of a commanditei since the amount

subscribed by commanditaires is all of it available to creditors,

the commanditaires losing their whole investment before any

creditor can lose anything; while, if instead of becoming

partners to that amount, they had lent the sum at an interest

equal to the profit they derived from it, they would have shared

with the other creditors in the residue of the estate,

diminishing pro rata the dividend obtained by all. While the

practice of commandite thus conduces to the interest of

creditors, it is often highly desirable for the contracting

parties themselves. The managers are enabled to obtain the aid of

a much greater amount of capital than they could borrow on their

own security; and persons are induced to aid useful undertakings,

by embarking limited portions of capital in them, when they would

not, and often could not prudently, have risked their whole

fortunes on the chances of the enterprise.

    It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are

afforded to joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships are

not required. But there are classes of cases to which the

commandite principle must always be better adapted than the

joint-stock principle. 'Suppose,' says M. Coquelin, 'an inventor

seeking for a capital to carry his invention into practice. To

obtain the aid of capitalists, he must offer them a share of the

anticipated benefit; they must associate themselves with him in

the chances of its success. In such a case, which of the forms

would he select? Not partnership, certainly'; for various

reasons, and especially the extreme difficulty of finding a

partner with capital, willing to risk his whole fortune on the

success of the invention.(6*) 'Neither would he select the

societe anonyme,' or any other form of joint-stock company, 'in

which he might be superseded as manager. He would stand, in such

an association, on no better footing than any other shareholder,

and he might be lost in the crowd; whereas, the association

existing, as it were, by and for him, the management would appear

to belong to him as a matter of right. Cases occur in which a

merchant or a manufacturer, without being precisely an inventor,

has undeniable claims to the management of an undertaking, from

the possession of qualities peculiarly calculated to promote its

success. So great, indeed,' continues M. Coquelin, 'is the

necessity, in many cases, for the limited partnership, that it is

difficult to conceive how we could dispense with or replace it':

and in reference to his own country he is probably in the right. 

    Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the

part of the public, to form joint-stock associations, even

without the encouragement of a limitation of responsibility;

commandite partnership, though its prohibition is in principle

quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be, in a merely

economical point of view, of the imperative necessity which M.

Coquelin ascribes to it. Yet the inconveniences are not small,

which arise indirectly from provisions of law by which every one

who shares in the profits of a concern is subject to the full

liabilities of an unlimited partnership. It is impossible to say

how many or what useful modes of combination are rendered

impracticable by such a state of the law. It is sufficient for

its condemnation that, unless in some way relaxed, it is

inconsistent with the payment of wages in part by a percentage on

profits; in other words, the association of the operatives as

virtual partners with the capitalist.(7*) 

    It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and

elevation of the working classes that complete freedom in the

conditions of partnership is indispensable. Combinations such as

the associations of workpeople, described in a former chapter,

are the most powerful means of effecting the social emancipation

of the labourers through their own moral qualities. Nor is the

liberty of association important solely for its examples of

success, but fully as much so for the sake of attempts which

would not succeed; but by their failure would give instruction

more impressive than can be afforded by anything short of actual

experience. Every theory of social improvement, the worth of

which is capable of being brought to an experimental test, should

be permitted, and even encouraged, to submit itself to that test.

From such experiments the active portion of the working classes

would derive lessons, which they would be slow to learn from the

teaching of persons supposed to have interests and prejudices

adverse to their good; would obtain the means of correcting, at

no cost to society, whatever is now erroneous in their notions of

the means of establishing their independence; and of discovering

the conditions, moral, intellectual, and industrial, which are

indispensably necessary for effecting without injustice, or for

effecting at all, the social regeneration they aspire to.(8*)

    The French law of partnership is superior to the English in

permitting commandite; and superior, in having no such

unmanageable instrument as the Court of Chancery, all cases

arising from commercial transactions being adjudicated in a

comparatively cheap and expeditious manner by a tribunal of

merchants. In other respects the French system was, and I

believe, still is, far worse than the English. A joint-stock

company with limited responsibility cannot be formed without the

express authorization of the department of government called the

Conseil d'Etat, a body of administrators, generally entire

strangers to industrial transactions, who have no interest in

promoting enterprises, and are apt to think that the purpose of

their institution is to restrain them; whose consent cannot in

any case be obtained without an amount of time and labour which

is a very serious hindrance to the commencement of an enterprise,

while the extreme uncertainty of obtaining that consent at all is

a great discouragement to capitalists who would be willing to

subscribe. In regard to joint-stock companies without limitation

of responsibility, which in England exist in such numbers and are

formed with such facility, these associations cannot, in France,

exist at all; for, in cases of unlimited partnership, the French

law does not permit the division of the capital into transferable

shares. 

    The best existing laws of partnership appear to be those of

the New England States. According to Mr Carey,(9*) 'nowhere is

association so little trammelled by regulations as in New

England; the consequence of which is, that it is carried to a

greater extent there, and particularly in Massachusetts and Rhode

Island, than in any other part of the world. In these states, the

soil is covered with compagnies anonymes -- chartered companies

-- for almost every conceivable purpose. Every town is a

corporation for the management of its roads, bridges, and

schools: which are, therefore, under the direct control of those

who pay for them, and are consequently well managed. Academies

and churches, lyceums and libraries, saving-fund societies, and

trust companies, exist in numbers proportioned to the wants of

the people, and all are corporations. Every district has its

local bank, of a size to suit its wants, the stock of which is

owned by the small capitalists of the neighbourhood, and managed

by themselves; the consequence of which is, that in no part of

the world is the system of banking so perfect -- so little liable

to vibration in the amount of loans -- the necessary effect of

which is, that in none is the value of property so little

affected by changes in the amount or value of the currency

resulting from the movements of their own banking institutions.

In the two states to which we have particularly referred, they

are almost two hundred in number. Massachusetts, alone, offers to

our view fifty-three insurance offices, of various forms,

scattered through the state, and all incorporated. Factories are

incorporated, and are owned in shares; and every one that has any

part in the management of their concerns, from the purchase of

the raw material to the sale of the manufactured article, is a

part owner; while every one employed in them has a prospect of

becoming one, by the use of prudence, exertion, and economy.

Charitable associations exist in large numbers, and all are

incorporated. Fishing vessels are owned in shares by those who

navigate them; and the sailors of a whaling ship depend in a

great degree, if not altogether, upon the success of the voyage

for their compensation. Every master of a vessel trading in the

Southern Ocean is a part owner, and the interest he possesses is

a strong inducement to exertion and economy, by aid of which the

people of New England are rapidly driving out the competition of

other nations for the trade of that part of the world. Wherever

settled, they exhibit the same tendency to combination of action.

In New York they are the chief owners of the lines of packet

ships, which are divided into shares, owned by the shipbuilders,

the merchants, the master, and the mates; which last generally

acquire the means of becoming themselves masters, and to this is

due their great success. The system is the most perfectly

democratic of any in the world. It affords to every labourer,

every sailor, every operative, male or female, the prospect of

advancement; and its results are precisely such as we should have

reason to expect. In no part of the world are talent, industry,

and prudence, so certain to be largely rewarded.'

    The cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of chartered

companies in America, which have caused so much loss and so much

scandal in Europe, did not occur in the part of the Union to

which this extract refers, but in other States, in which the

right of association is much more fettered by legal restrictions,

and in which, accordingly, joint-stock associations are not

comparable in number or variety to those of New England. Mr Carey

adds, 'A careful examination of the systems of the several

states, can scarcely, we think, fail to convince the reader of

the advantage resulting from permitting men to determine among

themselves the terms upon which they will associate, and allowing

the associations that may be formed to contract with the public

as to the terms upon which they will trade together, whether of

the limited or unlimited liability of the partners.' This

principle has been adopted as the foundation of all recent

English legislation on the subject 



    8. I proceed to the subject of Insolvency Laws.

    Good laws on this subject are important, first and

principally, on the score of public morals; which are on no point

more under the influence of the law, for good and evil, than in a

matter belonging so pre-eminently to the province of law as the

preservation of pecuniary integrity. But the subject is also, in

a merely economical point of view, of great importance. First,

because the economical well-being of a people, and of mankind,

depends in an especial manner upon their being able to trust each

other's engagements. Secondly, because one of the risks, or

expenses, of industrial operations is the risk or expense of what

are commonly called bad debts, and every saving which can be

effected in this liability is a diminution of cost of production;

by dispensing with an item of outlay which in no way conduces to

the desired end, and which must be paid for either by the

consumer of the commodity, or from the general profits of

capital, according as the burthen is peculiar or general. 

    The laws and practice of nations on this subject have almost

always been in extremes. The ancient laws of most countries were

all severity to the debtor. They invested the creditor with a

power of coercion, more or less tyrannical, which he might use

against his insolvent debtor, either to extort the surrender of

hidden property, or to obtain satisfaction of a vindictive

character, which might console him for the non.payment of the

debt. This arbitrary power has extended, in some countries, to

making the insolvent debtor serve the creditor as his slave: in

which plan there were at least some grains of common sense, since

it might possibly be regarded as a scheme for making him work out

the debt by his labour. In England the coercion assumed the

milder form of ordinary imprisonment. The one and the other were

the barbarous expedients of a rude age, repugnant to justice, as

well as to humanity. Unfortunately the reform of them, like that

of the criminal law generally, has been taken in hand as an

affair of humanity only, not of justice: and the modish humanity

of the present time, which is essentially a thing of one idea,

has in this as in other cases, gone into a violent reaction

against the ancient severity, and might almost be supposed to see

in the fact of having lost or squandered other people's property,

a peculiar title to indulgence. Everything in the law which

attached disagreeable consequences to that fact, was gradually

relaxed, or entirely got rid of: until the demoralizing effects

of this laxity became so evident as to determine, by more recent

legislation, a salutary though very insufficient movement in the

reverse direction. 

    The indulgence of the laws to those who have made themselves

unable to pay their just debts, is usually defended, on the plea

that the sole object of the law should be, in case of insolvency,

not to coerce the person of the debtor, but to get at his

property, and distribute it fairly among the creditors. Assuming

that this is and ought to be the sole object, the mitigation of

the law was in the first instance carried so far as to sacrifice

that object. Imprisonment at the discretion of a creditor was

really a powerful engine for extracting from the debtor any

property which he had concealed or otherwise made away with; and

it remains to be shown by experience whether, in depriving

creditors of this instrument, the law, even as last amended, has

furnished them with a sufficient equivalent. But the doctrine,

that the law has done all that ought to be expected from it, when

it has put the creditors in possession of the property of an

insolvent, is in itself a totally inadmissible piece of spurious

humanity. It is the business of law to prevent wrong-doing, and

not simply to patch up the consequences of it when it has been

committed. The law is bound to take care that insolvency shall

not be a good pecuniary speculation; that men shall not have the

privilege of hazarding other people's property without their

knowledge or consent, taking the profits of the enterprise if it

is successful, and if it fails throwing the loss upon the

rightful owners; and that they shall not find it answer to make

themselves unable to pay their just debts, by spending the money

of their creditors in personal indulgence. It is admitted that

what is technically called fraudulent bankruptcy, the false

pretence of inability to pay, is, when detected, properly subject

to punishment. But does it follow that insolvency is not the

consequence of misconduct because the inability to pay may be

real? If a man has been a spendthrift, or a gambler, with

property on which his creditors had a prior claim, shall he pass

scot-free because the mischief is consummated and the money gone?

Is there any very material difference in point of morality

between this conduct, and those other kinds of dishonesty which

go by the names of fraud and embezzlement? 

    Such cases are not a minority, but a large majority among

insolvencies. The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact. 'By

far the greater part of all insolvencies arise from notorious

misconduct; the proceedings of the Insolvent Debtors Court and of

the Bankruptcy Court will prove it. Excessive and unjustifiable

overtrading, or most absurd speculation in commodities, merely

because the poor speculator "thought they would get up", but why

he thought so he cannot tell; speculation in hops, in tea, in

silk, in corn -- things with which he is altogether unacquainted;

wild and absurd investments in foreign funds, or in joint stocks;

these are among the most innocent causes of bankruptcy.'(10*) The

experienced and intelligent writer from whom I quote,

corroborates his assertion by the testimony of several of the

official assignees of the Bankruptcy Court. One of them says, 'As

far as I can collect from the books and documents furnished by

the bankrupts, it seems to me that' in the whole number of cases

which occurred during a given time in the court to which he was

attached, 'fourteen have been ruined by speculations in thing

with which they were unacquainted; three by neglecting

bookkeeping; ten by trading beyond their capital and means, and

the consequent loss and expense of accommodation bills;

forty-nine by expending more than they could reasonably hope

their profits would be, though their business yielded a fair

return; none by any general distress, or the falling off of any

particular branch of trade.' Another of these officers says that,

during a period of eighteen months, 'fifty-two cases of

bankruptcy have come under my care. It is my opinion that

thirty-two of these have arisen from an imprudent expenditure,

and five partly from that cause, and partly from a pressure on

the business in which the bankrupts were employed. Fifteen I

attribute to improvident speculations, combined in many instances

with an extravagant mode of life.'

    To these citations the author adds the following statements

from his personal means of knowledge. 'Many insolvencies are

produced by tradesmen's indolence: they keep no books, or at

least imperfect ones, which they never balance; they never take

stock; they employ servants, if their trade be extensive, whom

they are too indolent even to supervise, and then become

insolvent. It is not too much to say, that one-half of all the

persons engaged in trade, even in London, never take stock at

all: they go on year after year without knowing how their affairs

stand, and at last, like the child at school, they find to their

surprise, but one halfpenny left in their pocket. I will venture

to say that not one-fourth of all the persons in the provinces,

either manufacturers, tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock; nor

in fact does one-half of them ever keep account-books, deserving

any other name than memorandum books. I know sufficient of the

concerns of five hundred small tradesmen in the provinces, to be

enabled to say, that not one.fifth of them ever take stock, or

keep even the most ordinary accounts. I am prepared to say of

such tradesmen, from carefully prepared tables, giving every

advantage where there has been any doubt as to the causes of

their insolvency, that where nine happen from extravagance or

dishonesty, one' at most 'may be referred to misfortune

alone.'(11*)

    Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any high

sense of justice, honour, or integrity, if the law enables men

who act in this manner to shuffle off the consequences of their

misconduct upon those who have been so unfortunate as to trust

them; and practically proclaims that it looks upon insolvency

thus produced, as a 'misfortune', not an offence? 

    It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise from

causes beyond the control of the debtor, and that, in many more

cases, his culpability is not of a high order; and the law ought

to make a distinction in favour of such cases, but not without a

searching investigation; nor should the case ever be let go

without having ascertained, in the most complete manner

practicable, not the fact of insolvency, but the cause of it. To

have been trusted with money or money's worth, and to have lost

or spent it, is prima facie evidence of something wrong: and it

is not for the creditor to prove, which he cannot do in one case

out of ten, that there has been criminality, but for the debtor

to rebut the presumption, by laying open the whole state of

affairs, and showing either that there has been no misconduct, or

that the misconduct has been of an excusable kind. If he fail in

this, he ought never to be dismissed without a punishment

proportioned to the degree of blame which seems justly imputable

to him; which punishment, however, might be shortened or

mitigated in proportion as he appeared likely to exert himself in

repairing the injury done. 

    It is a common argument with those who approve a relaxed

system of insolvency laws, that credit, except in the great

operations of commerce, is an evil; and that to deprive creditors

of legal redress is a judicious means of preventing credit from

being given. That which is given by retail dealers to

unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the excess to which it is

carried, a considerably evil. This, however, is only true of

large, and especially of long, credits; for there is credit

whenever goods are not paid for before they quit the shop, or, at

least, the custody of the seller; and there would be much

inconvenience in putting an end to this sort of credit. But a

large proportion of the debts on which insolvency laws take

effect, are those due by small tradesmen to the dealers who

supply them: and on no class of debts does the demoralization

occasioned by a bad state of the law, operate more perniciously.

These are commercial Credits, which no one wishes to see

curtailed; their existence is of great importance to the general

industry of the country, and to numbers of honest, well.conducted

persons of small means, to whom it would be a great injury that

they should be prevented from obtaining the accommodation they

need, and would not abuse, through the omission of the law to

provide just remedies against dishonest or reckless borrowers. 

    But though it were granted that retail transactions, on any

footing but that of ready money payment, are an evil, and their

entire suppression a fit subject for legislation to aim at; a

worse mode of compassing that object could scarcely be invented,

than to permit those who have been trusted by others to cheat and

rob them with impunity. The law does not generally select the

vices of mankind as the appropriate instrument for inflicting

chastisement on the comparatively innocent. When it seeks to

discourage any course of action, it does so by applying

inducements of its own, not by outlawing those who act in the

manner it deems objectionable, and letting loose the predatory

instincts of the worthless part of mankind to feed upon them. If

a man has committed murder the law condemns him to death; but it

does not promise impunity to anybody who may kill him for the

sake of taking his purse. The offence of believing another's

word, even rashly, is not so heinous that for the sake of

discouraging it the spectacle should be brought home to every

door, of triumphant rascality, with the law on its side, mocking

the victims it has made. This pestilent example has been very

widely exhibited since the relaxation of the insolvency laws. It

is idle to expect that, even by absolutely depriving creditors of

all legal redress, the kind of credit which is considered

objectionable would really be very much checked. Rogues and

swindlers are still an exception among mankind, and people will

go on trusting each other's promises. Large dealers, in abundant

business, would refuse credit, as many of them already do: but in

the eager competition of a great town, or the dependent position

of a village shopkeeper, what can be expected from the tradesman

to whom a single customer is of importance, the beginner,

perhaps, who is striving to get into business? He will take the

risk, even if it were still greater; he is ruined if he cannot

sell his goods, and he can be ruined if he is defrauded. Nor does

it avail to say, that he ought to make proper inquiries, and

ascertain the character of those to whom he supplies good on

trust. In some of the most flagrant cases of profligate debtors

which have come before the Bankruptcy Court, the swindler had

been able to give, and had given, excellent references. 



NOTES:



1. Principles of Political Economy, ed. 1843, p. 264. There is

much more to the same effect in the more recent treatise by the

same author, 'On the Succession to Property vacant by Death'.



2. Mr Cecil Fane, the Commissioner of the Bankruptcy Court, in

his evidence before the Committee on the Law of Partnership, says

"I remember a short time ago reading a written statement by two

eminent solicitors, who said that they had known many partnership

accounts go into Chancery, but that they never knew one come

out... Very few of the persons who would be disposed to engage in

partnerships of this kind' (co-operative associations of working

men) 'have any idea of the truth, namely that the decision of

questions arising amongst partners is really impracticable. 

    'Do they not know that one partner may rob the other without

any possibility of his obtaining redress? -- The fact is so; but

whether they know it or not, I cannot undertake to say.'

    This flagrant injustice is, in Mr Fane's opinion, wholly

attributable to the defects of the tribunal. 'My opinion is, that

if there is one thing more easy than another, it is the

settlement of partnership questions, and for the simple reason,

that everything which is done in a partnership is entered mode of

in the books; the evidence therefore is at hand; if therefore a

rational mode of proceeding were once adopted, the difficulty

would altogether vanish.' -- Minutes of Evidence annexed to the

Report of the Select Committee on the Law of Partnership (1851),

pp. 85-7. 



3. Report, ut supra, p. 167. 



4. See the Report already referred to, pp. 145-158. 



5. The quotation is from a translation published by Mr H.C.

Carey, in an American periodical, Hunt's Merchant's Magazine, for

May and June 1845. 



6. 'There has been a great deal of commiseration professed,' says

Mr Duncan, solicitor, 'towards the poor inventor; he has been

oppressed by the high cost of patents; but his chief oppression

has been the partnership law, which prevents his getting any one

to help him to develop his invention. He is a poor man, and

therefore cannot give security to a creditor; no one will lend

him money; the rate of interest offered, however high it may be,

is not an attraction. But if by the alteration of the law he

could allow capitalists to take an interest with him and share

the profits, while the risk should be confined to the capital

they embarked, there is very little doubt at all that he would

frequently get assistance from capitalists; whereas at the

present moment, with the law as it stands, he is completely

destroyed, and his invention is useless to him; he struggles

month after month; he applies again and again to the capitalist

without avail. I know it practically in two or three cases oF

patented inventions; especially one where parties with capital

were desirous oF entering into an undertaking of great moment in

Liverpool, but five or six different gentlemen were deterred from

doing so, all feeling the strongest objection to what each one

called the cursed partnership law.' Report, p. 155.

    Mr Fane says, 'in the course of my professional life, as a

Commissioner of the Court of Bankruptcy, I have learned that the

most unfortunate man in the world is an inventor. The difficulty

which an inventor finds in getting at capital involves him in all

sorts of embarrassments, and he ultimately is for the most part a

ruined man, and somebody else gets possession of his invention.'

ib. p. 82. 



7. It has been found possible to effect this through the Limited

Liability Act, by erecting the capitalist and his workpeople into

a Limited Company; as proposed by Messrs Briggs.



8. By an Act of the year 1852, called the industrial and

Provident Societies Act, for which the nation is indebted to the

public-spirited exertions of Mr Slaney, industrial associations

of working people are admitted to the statutory privileges of

Friendly Societies. This not only exempts them from the

formalities applicable to joint-stock companies, but provides for

the settlement of disputes among the partners without recourse to

the Court of Chancery. There are still some defects in the

provisions of this Act, which hamper the proceedings of the

Societies in several respects; as is pointed out in the Almanack

of the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers for 1861. 



9. In a note appended to his translation of M. Coquelin's paper. 



10. From a volume published in 1845, entitled Credit the Life of

Commerce, by Mr J. H. Elliot.



11. pp. 50-1. 


