


The Principles of Political Economy

by John Stuart Mill



Book 4



Chapter 7



On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring Classes



    1. The observations in the preceding chapter had for their

principal object to deprecate a false ideal of human society.

Their applicability to the practical purposes of present times,

consists in moderating the inordinate importance attached to the

mere increase of production, and fixing attention upon improved

distribution, and a large remuneration of labour, as the two

desiderata. Whether the aggregate produce increases absolutely or

not, is a thing in which, after a certain amount has been

obtained, neither the legislator nor the philanthropist need feel

any strong interest: but, that it should increase relatively to

the number of those who share in it, is of the utmost possible

importance; and this, (whether the wealth of mankind be

stationary, or increasing at the most rapid rate ever known in an

old country), must depend on the opinions and habits of the most

numerous class, the class of manual labourers. 

    When I speak, either in this place or elsewhere, of 'the

labouring classes', or of labourers as a 'class', I use those

phrases in compliance with custom, and as descriptive of an

existing, but by no means a necessary or permanent, state of

social relations. I do not recognize as either just or salutary,

a state of society in which there is any 'class' which is not

labouring; any human beings, exempt from bearing their share of

the necessary labours of human life, except those unable to

labour, or who have fairly earned rest by previous toil. So long,

however, as the great social evil exists of a non-labouring

class, labourers also constitute a class, and may be spoken of,

though only provisionally, in that character. 

    Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the

labouring people has latterly been a subject of much more

speculation and discussion than formerly; and the opinion that it

is not now what it ought to be, has become very general. The

suggestions which have been promulgated, and the controversies

which have been excited, on detached points rather than on the

foundations of the subject, have put in evidence the existence of

two conflicting theories, respecting the social position

desirable for manual labourers. The one may be called the theory

of dependence and protection, the other that of self-dependence. 

    According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, in all

things which affect them collectively, should be regulated for

them, not by them. They should not be required or encouraged to

think for themselves, or give to their own reflection or forecast

an influential voice in the determination of their destiny. It is

supposed to be the duty of the higher classes to think for them,

and to take the responsibility of their lot, as the commander and

officers of an army take that of the soldiers composing it. This

function, it is contended, the higher classes should prepare

themselves to perform conscientiously, and their whole demeanour

should impress the poor with a reliance on it, in order that,

while yielding passive and active obedience to the rules

prescribed for them, they may resign themselves in all other

respects to a trustful insouciance, and repose under the shadow

of their protectors. The relation between rich and poor,

according to this theory (a theory also applied to the relation

between men and women) should be only partly authoritative; it

should be amiable, moral, and sentimental: affectionate tutelage

on the one side, respectful and grateful deference on the other.

The rich should be in loco parentis to the poor, guiding and

restraining them like children. Of spontaneous action on their

part there should be no need. They should be called on for

nothing but to do their day's work, and to be moral and

religious. Their morality and religion should be provided for

them by their superiors, who should see them properly taught it,

and should do all that is necessary to ensure their being, in

return for labour and attachment, properly fed, clothed, housed,

spiritually edified, and innocently amused. 

    This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those whose

dissatisfaction with the present assumes the form of affection

and regret towards the past. Like other ideals, it exercises an

unconscious influence on the opinions and sentiments of numbers

who never consciously guide themselves by any ideal. It has also

this in common with other ideals, that it has never been

historically realized. It makes its appeal to our imaginative

sympathies in the character of a restoration of the good times of

our forefathers. But no times can be pointed out in which the

higher classes of this or any other country performed a part even

distantly resembling the one assigned to them in this theory. It

is an idealization, grounded on the conduct and character of here

and there an individual. All privileged and powerful classes, as

such, have used their power in the interest of their own

selfishness, and have indulged their self.importance in

despising, and not in lovingly caring for, those who were, in

their estimation, degraded by being under the necessity of

working for their benefit. I do not affirm that what has always

been must always be, or that human improvement has no tendency to

correct the intensely selfish fillings engendered by power; but

though the evil may be lessened, it cannot be eradicated, until

the power itself is withdrawn. This, at least, seems to me

undeniable, that long before the superior classes could be

sufficiently improved to govern in the tutelary manner supposed,

the inferior classes would be too much improved to be so

governed. 

    I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture

of society which this theory presents. Though the facts of it

have no prototype in the past, the feelings have. In them lies

all that there is of reality in the conception. As the idea is

essentially repulsive of a society only held together by the

relations and feelings arising out of pecuniary interests, so

there is something naturally attractive in a form of society

abounding in strong personal attachments and disinterested

self.devotion. Of such feelings it must be admitted that the

relation of protector and protected has hitherto been the richest

source. The strongest attachments of human beings in general, are

towards the things or the persons that stand between them and

some dreaded evil. Hence, in an age of lawless violence and

insecurity, and general hardness and roughness of manners, in

which life is beset with dangers and sufferings at every step, to

those who have neither a commanding position of their own, nor a

claim on the protection of some one who has -- a generous giving

of protection, and a grateful receiving of it, are the strongest

ties which connect human beings; the feelings arising from that

relation are their warmest feelings; all the enthusiasm and

tenderness of the most sensitive natures gather round it; loyalty

on the one part and chivalry on the other are principles exalted

into passions. I do not desire to depreciate these qualities. The

error lies in not perceiving, that these virtues and sentiments,

like the clanship and the hospitality of the wandering Arab,

belong emphatically to a rude and imperfect state of the social

union; and that the feelings between protector and protected,

whether between kings and subjects, rich and poor, or men and

women, can no longer have this beautiful and endearing character,

where there are no longer any serious dangers from which to

protect. What is there in the present state of society to make it

natural that human beings, of ordinary strength and courage,

should glow with the warmest gratitude and devotion in return for

protection? The laws protect them, wherever the laws do not

criminally fail in their duty. To be under the power of some one,

instead of being as formerly the sole condition of safety, is

now, speaking generally, the only situation which exposes to

grievous wrong. The so-called protectors are now the only persons

against whom, in any ordinary circumstances, protection is

needed. The brutality and tyranny with which every police report

is filled, are those of husbands to wives, of parents to

children. That the law does not prevent these atrocities, that it

is only now making a first timid attempt to repress and punish

them, is no matter of necessity, but the deep disgrace of those

by whom the laws are made and administered. No man or woman who

either possesses or is able to earn an independent livelihood,

requires any other protection than that which the law could and

ought to give. This being the case, it argues great ignorance of

human nature to continue taking for granted that relations

founded on protection must always subsist, and not to see that

the assumption of the part of protector, and of the power which

belongs to it, without any of the necessities which justify it,

must engender feelings opposite to loyalty. 

    Of the working men, at least in the more advanced countries

of Europe, it may be pronounced certain, that the patriarchal or

paternal system of government is one to which they will not again

be subject. That question was decided, when they were taught to

read, and allowed access to newspapers and political tracts; when

dissenting preachers were suffered to go among them, and appeal

to their faculties and feelings in opposition to the creeds

professed and countenanced by their superiors; when they were

brought together in numbers, to work socially under the same

roof; when railways enabled them to shift from place to place,

and change their patrons and employers as easily as their coats;

when they were encouraged to seek a share in the government, by

means of the electoral franchise. The working classes have taken

their interests into their own hands, and are perpetually showing

that they think the interests of their employers not identical

with their own, but opposite to them. Some among the higher

classes flatter themselves that these tendencies may be

counteracted by moral and religious education: but they have let

the time go by for giving an education which can serve their

purpose. The principles of the Reformation have reached as low

down in society as reading and writing, and the poor will not

much longer accept morals and religion of other people's

prescribing. I speak more particularly of this country,

especially the town population, and the districts of the most

scientific agriculture or the highest wages, Scotland and the

north of England. Among the more inert and less modernized

agricultural population of the southern counties, it might be

possible for the gentry to retain, for some time longer,

something of the ancient deference and submission of the poor, by

bribing them with high wages and constant employment; by insuring

them support, and never requiring them to do anything which they

do not like. But these are two conditions which never have been

combined, and never can be, for long together. A guarantee of

subsistence can only be practically kept up, when work is

enforced and superfluous multiplication restrained by at least a

moral compulsion. It is then, that the would-be revivers of old

times which they do not understand, would feel practically in how

hopeless a task they were engaged. The whole fabric of

patriarchal or seignorial influence, attempted to be raised on

the foundation of caressing the poor, would be shattered against

the necessity of enforcing a stringent Poor-law. 



    2. It is on a far other basis that the well-being and

well-doing of the labouring people must henceforth rest. The poor

have come out of leading.strings, and cannot any longer be

governed or treated like children. To their own qualities must

now be commended the care of their destiny. Modern nations will

have to learn the lesson, that the well-being of a people must

exist by means of the justice and self-government, the and of the

individual citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to

dispense with the necessity of these qualities in the dependent

classes. But now, when even in position they are becoming less

and less dependent, and their minds less and less acquiescent in

the degree of dependence which remains, the virtues of

independence are those which they stand in need of. Whatever

advice, exhortation or guidance is held out to the labouring

classes, must henceforth be tendered to them as equals and

accepted by them with their eyes open. The prospect of the future

depends on the degree in which they can be made rational beings. 

    There is no reason to believe that prospect other than

hopeful. The progress indeed has hitherto been, and still is,

slow. But there is a spontaneous education going on in the minds

of the multitude, which may be greatly accelerated and improved

by artificial aids. The instruction obtained from newspapers and

political tracts may not be the most solid kind of instruction,

but it is an immense improvement upon none at all. What it does

for a people, has been admirably exemplified during the cotton

crisis, in the case of the Lancashire spinners and weavers, who

have acted with the consistent good sense and forbearance so

justly applauded, simply because, being readers of newspapers,

they understood the causes of the calamity which had befallen

them, and knew that it was in no way imputable either to their

employers or to the Government. It is not certain that their

conduct would have been as rational and exemplary, if the

distress had preceded the salutary measure of fiscal emancipation

which gave existence to the penny press. The institutions for

lectures and discussion, the collective deliberations on

questions of common interest, the trades unions, the political

agitation, all serve to awaken public spirit, to diffuse variety

of ideas among the mass, and to excite thought and reflection in

the more intelligent. Although the too early attainment of

political franchises by the least educated class might retard,

instead of promoting, their improvement, there can be little

doubt that it has been greatly stiPulated by the attempt to

acquire them. In the meantime, the working classes are now part

of the public; in all discussions on matters of general interest

they, or a portion of them, are now partakers; all who use the

press as an instrument may, if it so happens, have them for an

audience; the avenues of instruction through which the middle

classes acquire such ideas as they have, are accessible to, at

least, the operatives in the towns. With these resources, it

cannot be doubted that they will increase in intelligence, even

by their own unaided efforts; while there is reason to hope that

great improvements both in the quality and quantity of school

education will be effected by the exertions either of government

or of individuals, and that the progress of the mass of the

people in mental cultivation, and in the virtues which are

dependent on it, will take place more rapidly, and with fewer

intermittences and aberrations, than if left to itself. 

    From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be

confidently anticipated. First: that they will become even less

willing than at present to be led and governed, and directed into

the way they should go, by the mere authority and prestige of

superiors. If they have not now, still less will they have

hereafter, any deferential awe, or religious principle of

obedience, holding them in mental subjection to a class above

them. The theory of dependence and protection will be more and

more intolerable to them, and they will require that their

conduct and condition shall be essentially self-governed. It is,

at the same time, quite possible that they may demand, in many

cases, the intervention of the legislature in their affairs, and

the regulation by law of various things which concern them, often

under very mistaken ideas and suggestions, to which they will

demand that effect should be given, and not rules laid down for

them by other people. It is quite consistent with this, that they

should feel respect for superiority of intellect and knowledge,

and defer much to the opinions, on any subject, of those whom

they think well acquainted with it. Such deference is deeply

grounded in human nature; but they will judge for themselves of

the persons who are and are not entitled to it. 



    3. It appears to me impossible but that the increase of

intelligence, of education, and of the love of independence among

the working classes, must be attended with a corresponding growth

of the good sense which manifests itself in provident habits of

conduct, and that population, therefore, will bear a gradually

diminishing ratio to capital and employment. This most desirable

result would be much accelerated by another change, which lies in

the direct line of the best tendencies of the time; the opening

of industrial occupations freely to both sexes. The same reasons

which make it no longer necessary that the poor should depend on

the rich, make it equally unnecessary that women should depend on

men; and the least which justice requires is that law and custom

should not enforce dependence (when the correlative protection

has become superfluous) by ordaining that a woman, who does not

happen to have a provision by inheritance, shall have scarcely

any means open to her of gaining a livelihood, except as a wife

and mother. Let women who prefer that occupation, adopt it; but

that there should be no option, no other career possible for the

great majority of women, except in the humbler departments of

life, is a flagrant social injustice. The ideas and institutions

by which the accident of sex is made the groundwork of an

inequality of legal rights, and a forced dissimilarity of social

functions, must ere long be recognized as the greatest hindrance

to moral, social, and even intellectual improvement. On the

present occasion I shall only indicate, among the probable

consequences of the industrial and social independence of women,

a great diminution of the evil of over-population. It is by

devoting one-half of the human species to that exclusive

function, by making it fill the entire life of one sex, and

interweave itself with almost all the objects of the other, that

the animal instinct in question is nursed into the

disproportionate preponderance which it has hitherto exercised in

human life. 



    4. The political consequences of the increasing power and

importance of the operative classes, and of the growing

ascendancy of numbers, which, even in England and under the

present institutions, is rapidly giving to the will of the

majority at least a negative voice in the acts of government, are

too wide a subject to be discussed in this place. But, confining

ourselves to economical considerations, and notwithstanding the

effect which improved intelligence in the working classes,

together with just laws, may have in altering the distribution of

the produce to their advantage, I cannot think that they will be

permanently contented with the condition of labouring for wages

as their ultimate state. They may be willing to pass through the

class of servants in their way to that of employers; but not to

remain in it all their lives. To begin as hired labourers, then

after a few years to work on their own account, and finally

employ others, is the normal condition of labourers in a new

country, rapidly increasing in wealth and population, like

America or Australia. But in an old and fully peopled country,

those who begin life as labourers for hire, as a general rule,

continue such to the end, unless they sink into the still lower

grade of recipients of public charity. In the present stage of

human progress, when ideas of equality are daily spreading more

widely among the poorer classes, and can no longer be checked by

anything short of the entire suppression of printed discussion

and even of freedom of speech, it is not to be expected that the

division of the human race into two hereditary classes, employers

and employed, can be permanently maintained. The relation is

nearly as unsatisfactory to the payer of wages as to the

receiver. If the rich regard the poor as, by a kind of natural

law, their servants and dependents, the rich in their turn are

regarded as a mere prey and pasture for the poor; the subject of

demands and expectations wholly indefinite, increasing in extent

with every concession made to them. The total absence of regard

for justice or fairness in the relations between the two, is as

marked on the side of the employed as on that of the employers.

We look in vain among the working classes in general for the just

pride which will choose to give good work for good wages; for the

most part, their sole endeavour is to receive as much, and return

as little in the shape of service, as possible. It will sooner or

later become insupportable to the employing classes, to live in

close and hourly contact with persons whose interests and

feelings are in hostility to them. Capitalists are almost as much

interested as labourers in placing the operations of industry on

such a footing, that those who labour for them may feel the same

interest in the work, which is felt by those who labour on their

own account. 

    The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise

respect. ing small landed properties and peasant proprietors, may

have made the reader anticipate that a wide diffusion of property

in land is the resource on which I rely for exempting at least

the agricultural labourers from exclusive dependence on labour

for hire. Such, however, is not my opinion. I indeed deem that

form of agricultural economy to be most groundlessly cried down,

and to be greatly preferable, in its aggregate effects on human

happiness, to hired labour in any form in which it exists at

present; because the prudential check to population acts more

directly, and is shown by experience to be more efficacious; and

because, in point of security, of independence, of exercise of

any other than the animal faculties, the state of a peasant

proprietor is far superior to that of an agricultural labourer in

this or any other old country. Where the former system already

exists, and works on the whole satisfactorily, I should regret,

in the present state of human intelligence, to see it abolished

in order to make way for the other, under a pedantic notion of

agricultural improvement as a thing necessarily the same in every

diversity of circumstances. In a backward state of industrial

improvement, as in Ireland, I should urge its introduction, in

preference to an exclusive system of hired labour; as a more

powerful instrument for raising a population from semi-savage

listlessness and recklessness, to persevering industry and

prudent calculation. 

    But a people who have once adopted the large system of

production, either in manufactures or in agriculture, are not

likely to recede from it; and when population is kept in due

proportion to the means of support, it is not desirable that they

should. Labour is unquestionably more productive on the system of

large industrial enterprises; the produce, if not greater

absolutely, is greater in proportion to the labour employed: the

same number of persons can be supported equally well with less

toil and greater leisure; which will be wholly an advantage, as

soon as civilization and improvement have so far advanced, that

what is a benefit to the whole shall be a benefit to each

individual composing it. And in the moral aspect of the question,

which is still more important than the economical, something

better should be aimed at as the goal of industrial improvement,

than to disperse mankind over the earth in single families, each

ruled internally, as families now are, by a patriarchal despot,

and having scarcely any community of interest, or necessary

mental communion, with other human beings. The domination of the

head of the family over the other members, in this state of

things, is absolute; while the effect on his own mind tends

towards concentration of all interests in the family, considered

as an expansion of self, and absorption of all passions in that

of exclusive possession, of all cares in those of preservation

and acquisition. As a step out of the merely animal state into

the human, out of reckless abandonment to brute instincts into

prudential foresight and self-government, this moral condition

may be seen without displeasure. But if public spirit, generous

sentiments, or true justice and equality are desired,

association, not isolation, of interests, is the school in which

these excellences are nurtured. The aim of improvement should be

not solely to place human beings in a condition in which they

will be able to do without one another, but to enable them to

work with or for one another in relations not involving

dependence. Hitherto there has been no alternative for those who

lived by their labour, but that of labouring either each for

himself alone, or for a master. But the civilizing and improving

influences of association, and the efficiency and economy of

production on a large scale, may be obtained without dividing the

producers into two parties with hostile interests and feelings,

the many who do the work being mere servants under the command of

the one who supplies the funds, and having no interest of their

own in the enterprise except to earn their wages with as little

labour as possible. The speculations and discussions of the last

fifty years, and the events of the last thirty, are abundantly

conclusive on this point. If the improvement which even

triumphant military despotism has only retarded, not stopped,

shall continue its course, there can be little doubt that the

status of hired labourers will gradually tend to confine itself

to the description of work-people whose low moral qualities

render them unfit for anything more independent: and that the

relation of masters and work-people will be gradually superseded

by partnership, in one of two forms: in some cases, association

of the labourers with the capitalist; in others, and perhaps

finally in all, association of labourers among themselves. 



    5. The first of these forms of association has long been

practised, not indeed as a rule, but as an exception. In several

departments of industry there are already cases in which every

one who contributes to the work, either by labour or by pecuniary

resources, has a partner's interest in it, proportional to the

value of his contribution. It is already a common practice to

remunerate those in whom peculiar trust is reposed, by means of a

percentage on the profits: and cases exist in which the principle

is, with excellent success, carried down to the class of mere

manual labourers.    In the American ships trading to China, it

has long been the custom for every sailor to have an interest in

the profits of the voyage; and to this has been ascribed the

general good conduct of those seamen, and the extreme rarity of

any collision between them and the government or people of the

country. An instance in England, not so well known as it deserves

to be, is that of the Cornish miners. 'In Cornwall the mines are

worked strictly on the system of joint adventure; gangs of miners

contracting with the agent, who represents the owner of the mine,

to execute a certain portion of a vein and fit the ore for

market, at the price of so much in the pound of the sum for which

the ore is sold. These contracts are put up at certain regular

periods, generally every two months, and taken by a voluntary

partnership of men accustomed to the mine. This system has its

disadvantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and irregularity

of the earnings, and consequent necessity of living for long

periods on credit; but it has advantages which more than

counterbalance these drawbacks. It produces a degree of

intelligence, independence, and moral elevation, which raise the

condition and character of the Cornish miner far above that of

the generality of the labouring class. We are told by Dr Carham,

that "they are not only, as a class, intelligent for labourers,

but men of considerable knowledge". Also, that "they have a

character of independence, some. thing American, the system by

which the contracts are let giving the takers entire freedom to

make arrangements among themselves; so that each man feels, as a

partner in his little firm, that he meets his employers on nearly

equal terms"... With this basis of intelligence and independence

in their character, we are not surprised when we hear that "a

very great number of miners are now located on possessions of

their own, leased for three lives or ninety-nine years, on which

they have built houses"; or that "281,541l. are deposited in

saving banks in Cornwall, of which two-thirds are estimated to

belong to miners".'(1*)

    Mr Babbage, who also gives an account of this system,

observes that the payment to the crews of whaling ships is

governed by a similar principle; and that 'the profits arising

from fishing with nets on the south coast of England are thus

divided: one-half the produce belongs to the owner of the boat

and net; the other half is divided in equal portions between the

persons using it, who are also bound to assist in repairing the

net when required.' Mr Babbage has the great merit of having

pointed out the practicability, and the advantage, of extending

the principle to manufacturing industry generally.(2*)

    Some attention has been excited by an experiment of this

nature, commenced above thirty years ago by a Paris tradesman, a

house-painter, M. Leclaire,(3*) and described by him in a

pamphlet published in the year 1842. M. Leclaire, according to

his statement, employs on an average two hundred workmen, whom he

pays in the usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries. He assigns

to himself, besides interest for his capital, a fixed allowance

for his labour and responsibility as manager. At the end of the

year, the surplus profits are divided among the body, himself

included, in the proportion of their salaries.(4*) The reasons by

which M. Leclaire was led to adopt this system are highly

instructive. Finding the conduct of his workmen unsatisfactory,

he first tried the effect of giving higher wages, and by this he

managed to obtain a body of excellent workmen, who would not quit

his service for any other. 'Having thus succeeded' (I quote from

an abstract of the pamphlet in Chambers' Journal,(5*)) 'in

producing some sort of stability in the arrangement of his

establishment, M. Leclaire expected, he says, to enjoy greater

peace of mind. In this, however, he was disappointed. So long as

he was able to superintend everything himself, from the general

concerns of his business down to its minutest details, he did

enjoy a certain satisfaction; but from the moment that, owing to

the increase of his business, he found that he could be nothing

more than the centre from which orders were issued, and to which

reports were brought in, his former anxiety and discomfort

returned upon him.' He speaks lightly of the other sources of

anxiety to which a tradesman is subject, but describes as an

incessant cause of vexation the losses arising from the

misconduct of workmen. An employer 'will find workmen whose

indifference to his interests is such that they do not perform

two-thirds of the amount of work which they are capable of; hence

the continual fretting of masters, who, seeing their interests

neglected, believe themselves entitled to suppose that workmen

are constantly conspiring to ruin those from whom they derive

their livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of constant

employment, his position would in some respects be more enviable

than that of the master, because he is assured of a certain

amount of day's wages, which he will get whether he works much or

little. He runs no risk, and has no other motive to stimulate him

to do his best than his own sense of duty. The master, on the

other hand, depends greatly on chance for his returns: his

position is one of continual irritation and anxiety. This would

no longer be the case to the same extent, if the interests of the

master and those of the workmen were bound up with each other,

connected by some bond of mutual security, such as that which

would be obtained by the plan of a yearly division of profits.'

    Until the passing of the Limited Liability Act, it was held

that an arrangement similar to M. Leclaire's would have been

impossible in England, as the workmen could not, in the previous

state of the law, have been associated in the profits, without

being liable for losses. One of the many benefits of that great

legislative improvement has been to render partnerships of this

description possible, and we may now expect to see them carried

into practice. Messrs Briggs, of the Whitwood and Methley

collieries, near Normanton in Yorkshire, have taken the first

step. They now work these mines by a company, two-thirds of the

capital of which they themselves continue to hold, but undertake,

in the allotment of the remaining third, to give the preference

to the 'officials and operatives employed in the concern'; and,

what is of still greater importance, whenever the annual profit

exceeds 10 per cent, one-half the excess is divided among the

work-people and employes, whether shareholders or not, in

proportion to their earnings during the year. It is highly

honourable to these important employers of labour to have

initiated a system so full of benefit both to the operatives

employed and to the general interest of social improvement: and

they express no more than a just confidence in the principle when

they say, that 'the adoption of the mode of appropriation thus

recommended would, it is believed, add so great an element of

success to the undertaking as to increase rather than diminish

the dividend to the shareholders.' 



    6. The form of association, however, which if mankind

continue to improve, must be expected in the end to predominate,

is not that which can exist between a capitalist as chief, and

work. people without a voice in the management, but the

association of the labourers themselves on terms of equality,

collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their

operations, and working under managers elected and removable by

themselves. So long as this idea remained in a state of theory,

in the writings of Owen or of Louis Blanc, it may have appeared,

to the common modes of judgment, incapable of being realized, and

not likely to be tried unless by seizing on the existing capital,

and confiscating it for the benefit of the labourers; which is

even now imagined by many persons, and pretended by more, both in

England and on the Continent, to be the meaning and purpose of

Socialism. But there is a capacity of exertion and self-denial in

the masses of mankind, which is never known but on the rare

occasions on which it is appealed to in the name of some great

idea or elevated sentiment. Such an appeal was made by the French

Revolution of 1848. For the first time it then seemed to the

intelligent and generous of the working classes of a great

nation, that they had obtained a government who sincerely desired

the freedom and dignity of the many, and who did not look upon it

as their natural and legitimate state to be instruments of

production, worked for the benefit of the possessors of capital.

Under this encouragement, the ideas sown by Socialist writers, of

an emancipation of labour to be effected by means of association,

throve and fructified; and many working people came to the

resolution, not only that they would work for one another,

instead of working for a master tradesman or manufacturer, but

that they would also free themselves, at whatever cost of labour

or privation, from the necessity of paying, out of the produce of

their industry, a heavy tribute for the use of capital; that they

would extinguish this tax, not by robbing the capitalists of what

they or their predecessors had acquired by labour and preserved

by economy, but by honestly acquiring capital for themselves. If

only a few operatives had attempted this arduous task, or if,

while many attempted it, a few only had succeeded, their success

might have been deemed to furnish no argument for their system as

a permanent mode of industrial organization. But, excluding all

the instances of failure, there exist, or existed a short time

ago, upwards of a hundred successful, and many eminently

prosperous, associations of operatives in Paris alone, besides a

considerable number in the departments. 

    The same admirable qualities by which the associations were

carried through their early struggles, maintained them in their

increasing prosperity. Their rules of discipline, instead of

being more lax, are stricter than those of ordinary workshops;

but being rules self.imposed, for the manifest good of the

community, and not for the convenience of an employer regarded as

having an opposite interest, they are far more scrupulously

obeyed, and the voluntary obedience carries with it a sense of

personal worth and dignity. With wonderful rapidity the

associated workpeople have learnt to correct those of the ideas

they set out with, which are in opposition to the teaching of

reason and experience. Almost all the associations, at first,

excluded piece-work, and gave equal wages whether the work done

was more or less. Almost all have abandoned this system, and

after allowing to every one a fixed minimum, sufficient for

subsistence, they apportion all further remuneration according to

the work done: most of them even dividing the profits at the end

of the year, in the same proportion as the earnings. 

    It is the declared principle of most of these associations,

that they do not exist for the mere private benefit of the

individual members, but for the promotion of the co-operative

cause. With every extension, therefore, of their business, they

take in additional members, not (when they remain faithful to

their original plan) to receive wages from them as hired

labourers, but to enter at once into the full benefits of the

association, without being required to bring anything in, except

their labour: the only condition imposed is that of receiving

during a few years a smaller share in the annual division of

profits, as some equivalent for the sacrifices of the founders.

When members quit the association, which they are always at

liberty to do, they carry none of the capital with them: it

remains an indivisible property, of which the members for the

time being have the use, but not the arbitrary disposal: by the

stipulations of most of the contracts, even if the association

breaks up, the capital cannot be divided, but must be devoted

entire to some work of beneficence or of public utility. A fixed,

and generally a considerable, proportion of the annual profits is

not shared among the members, but added to the capital of the

association, or devoted to the repayment of advances previously

made to it: another portion is set aside to provide for the sick

and disabled, and another to form a fund for extending the

practice of association, or aiding other associations in their

need. The managers are paid, like other members, for the time

which is occupied in management, usually at the rate of the

highest paid labour: but the rule is adhered to, that the

exercise of power shall never be an occasion of profit. 

    Of the ability of the associations to compete successfully

with individual capitalists, even at an early period of their

existence, M. Feugueray(6*) said, 'Les associations qui ont ete

fondees depuis deux annees, avaient bien des obstacles a vaincre;

la plupart manquaient presque absolument de capital; toutes

marchaient dans une voie encore inexploree; elles bravaient les

perils qui menacent toujours les novateurs et les debutants. Et

neanmoins, dans beaucoup d'industries ou elles se sont etablies,

elles constituent deja pour les anciennes maisons une rivalite

redoutable, qui suscite meme des plaintes nombreuses dans une

partie de la bourgeoisie, non pas seulement chez les traiteurs,

les limonadiers et les coiffeurs, c'est-a-dire dans les

industries ou la nature des produits permet aux associations de

compter sur la clientele democratique, mais dans d'autres

industries ou elles n'ont pas les memes avantages. On n'a qu'a

consulter par exemple les fabricants de fauteuils, de chaises, de

limes, et l'on saura d'eux si les etablissements les plus

importants en leurs genres de fabrication ne sont pas les

etablissements des associes.' The vitality of these associations

must indeed be great, to have enabled about twenty of them to

survive not only the anti-socialist reaction, which for the time

discredited all attempts to enable workpeople to be their own

employers -- not only the tracasseries of the police, and the

hostile policy of the government since the usurpation -- but in

addition to these obstacles, all the difficulties arising from

the trying condition of financial and commercial affairs from

1854 to 1858. Of the prosperity attained by some of them even

while passing through this difficult period, I have given

examples which must be conclusive to all minds as to the

brilliant future reserved for the principle of cooperation. 

    It is not in France alone that these associations have

commenced a career of prosperity. To say nothing at present of

Germany, Piedmont, and Switzerland (where the Konsum-Verein of

Zurich is one of the most prosperous cooperative associations in

Europe), England can produce cases of success rivalling even

those which I have cited from France. Under the impulse commenced

by Mr Owen, and more recently propagated by the writings and

personal efforts of a band of friends, chiefly clergymen and

barristers, to whose noble exertions too much praise can scarcely

be given, the good seed was widely sown; the necessary

alterations in the English law of partnership were obtained from

Parliament, on the benevolent and public.spirited initiative of

Mr Slaney; many industrial associations, and a still greater

number of cooperative stores for retail purchases, were founded.

Among these are already many instances of remarkable prosperity,

the most signal of which are the Leeds Flour Mill, and the

Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers. Of this last association,

the most successful of all, the history has been written in a

very interesting manner by Mr Holyoake;(7*) and the notoriety

which by this and other means has been given to facts so

encouraging, is causing a rapid extension of associations with

similar objects in Lancashire, Yorkshire, London, and elsewhere.

It is not necessary to enter into any details respecting the sub.

sequent history of English Co-operation; the less so, as it is

now one of the recognized elements in the progressive movement of

the age, and, as such, has latterly been the subject of elaborate

articles in most of our leading periodicals, one of the most

recent and best of which was in the Edinburgh Review for October

1864: and the progress of Cooperation from month to month is

regularly chronicled in the Co-operator. I must not, however,

omit to mention the last great step in advance in reference to

the Cooperative Stores, the formation in the North of England

(and another is in course of formation in London) of a Wholesale

Society, to dispense with the services of the wholesale merchant

as well as of the retail dealer, and extend to the Societies the

advantage which each society gives to its own members, by an

agency for cooperative purchases, of foreign as well as domestic

commodities, direct from the producers. 

    It is hardly possible to take any but a hopeful view of the

prospects of mankind, when, in two leading countries of the

world, the obscure depths of society contain simple working men

whose integrity, good sense, self-command, and honourable

confidence in one another, have enabled them to carry these noble

experiments to the triumphant issue which the facts recorded in

the preceding pages attest. From the progressive advance of the

co-operative movement, a great increase may be looked for even in

the aggregate productiveness of industry. The sources of the

increase are twofold. In the first place, the class of mere

distributors, who are not producers but auxiliaries of

production, and whose inordinate numbers, far more than the gains

of capitalists, are the cause why so great a portion of the

wealth produced does not reach the producers -- will be reduced

to more modest dimensions. Distributors differ from producers in

this, that when producers increase, even though in any given

department of industry they may be too numerous, they actually

produce more: but the multiplication of distributors does not

make more distribution to be done, more wealth to be distributed;

it does but divide the same work among a greater number of

persons, seldom even cheapening the process. By limiting the

distributors to the number really required for making the

commodities accessible to the consumers which is the direct

effect of the cooperative system -- a vast number of hands will

be set free for production, and the capital which feeds and the

gains which remunerate them will be applied to feed and

remunerate producers. This great economy of the world's resources

would be realized even if co-operation stopped at associations

for purchase and consumption, without extending to production. 

    The other mode in which cooperation tends, still more

efficaciously, to increase the productiveness of labour, consists

in the vast stimulus given to productive energies, by placing the

labourers, as a mass, in a relation to their work which would

make it their principle and their interest -- at present it is

neither -- to do the utmost, instead of the least possible, in

exchange for their remuneration. It is scarcely possible to rate

too highly this material benefit, which yet is as nothing

compared with the moral revolution in society that would

accompany it: the healing of the standing feud between capital

and labour; the transformation of human life, from a conflict of

classes struggling for opposite interests, to a friendly rivalry

in the pursuit of a good common to all; the elevation of the

dignity of labour; a new sense of security and independence in

the labouring class; and the conversion of each human being's

daily occupation into a school of the social sympathies and the

practical intelligence. 

    Such is the noble idea which the promoters of Co-operation

should have before them. But to attain, in any degree, these

objects, it is indispensable that all, and not some only, of

those who do the work should be identified in interest with the

prosperity of the undertaking. Associations which, when they have

been successful, renounce the essential principle of the system,

and become joint-stock companies of a limited number of

shareholders, who differ from those of other companies only in

being working men; associations which employ hired labourers

without any interest in the profits (and I grieve to say that the

Manufacturing Society even of Rochdale has thus degenerated) are,

no doubt, exercising a lawful right in honestly employing the

existing system of society to improve their position as

individuals, but it is not from them that anything need be

expected towards replacing that system by a better. Neither will

such societies, in the long run, succeed in keeping their ground

against individual competition. Individual management, by the one

person principally interested, has great advantages over every

description of collective management. Co-operation has but one

thing to oppose to those advantages -- the common interest of all

the workers in the work. When individual capitalists, as they

will certainly do, add this to their other points of advantage;

when, even if only to increase their gains, they take up the

practice which these cooperative societies have dropped, and

connect the pecuniary interest of every person in their

employment with the most efficient and most economical management

of the concern; they are likely to gain an easy victory over

societies which retain the defects, while they cannot possess the

full advantages, of the old system. 

    Under the most favourable supposition, it will be desirable,

and perhaps for a considerable length of time, that individual

capitalists, associating their work-people in the profits, should

coexist with even those cooperative societies which are faithful

to the cooperative principle. Unity of authority makes many

things possible, which could not or would not be undertaken

subject to the chance of divided councils or changes in the

management. A private capitalist, exempt from the control of a

body, if he is a person of capacity, is considerably more likely

than almost any association to run judicious risks, and originate

costly improvements. Co-operative societies may be depended on

for adopting improvements after they have been tested by success,

but individuals are more likely to commence things previously

untried. Even in ordinary business, the competition of capable

persons who in the event of failure are to have all the loss, and

in the case of success the greater part of the gain, will be very

useful in keeping the managers of cooperative societies up to the

due pitch of activity and vigilance. 

    When, however, cooperative societies shall have sufficiently

multiplied, it is not probable that any but the least valuable

work-people will any longer consent to work all their lives for

wages merely; both private capitalists and associations will

gradually find it necessary to make the entire body of labourers

participants in profits. Eventually, and in perhaps a less remote

future than may be supposed, we may, through the cooperative

principle, see our way to a change in society, which would

combine the freedom and independence of the individual, with the

moral, intellectual, and economical advantages of aggregate

production; and which, without violence or spoliation, or even

any sudden disturbance of existing habits and expectations, would

realize, at least in the industrial department, the best

aspirations of the democratic spirit, by putting an end to the

division of society into the industrious and the idle, and

effacing all social distinctions but those fairly earned by

personal services and exertions. Associations like those which we

have described, by the very process of their success, are a

course of education in those moral and active qualities by which

alone success can be either deserved or attained. As associations

multiplied, they would tend more and more to absorb all

work-people, except those who have too little understanding, or

too little virtue, to be capable of learning to act on any other

system than that of narrow selfishness. As this change proceeded,

owners of capital would gradually find it to their advantage,

instead of maintaining the struggle of the old system with

work-people of only the worst description, to lend their capital

to the associations; to do this at a diminishing rate of

interest, and at last, perhaps, even to exchange their capital

for terminable annuities. In this or some such mode, the existing

accumulations of capital might honestly, and by a kind of

spontaneous process, become in the end the joint property of all

who participate in their productive employment: a transformation

which, thus effected, (and assuming of course that both sexes

participate equally in the rights and in the government of the

association)(8*) would be the nearest approach to social justice,

and the most beneficial ordering of industrial affairs for the

universal good, which it is possible at present to foresee. 



    7. I agree, then with the Socialist writers in their

conception of the form which industrial operations tend to assume

in the advance of improvement; and I entirely share their opinion

that the time is ripe for commencing this transformation, and

that it should by all just and effectual means be aided and

encouraged. But while I agree and sympathize with Socialists in

this practical portion of their aims, I utterly dissent from the

most conspicuous and vehement part of their teaching, their

declamations against competition. With moral conceptions in many

respects far ahead of the existing arrangements of society, they

have in general very confused and erroneous notions of its actual

working; and one of their greatest errors, as I conceive, is to

charge upon competition all the economical evils which at present

exist. They forget that wherever competition is not, monopoly is;

and that monopoly, in all its forms, is the taxation of the

industrious for the support of indolence, if not of plunder. They

forget, too, that with the exception of competition among

labourers, all other competition is for the benefit of the

labourers, by cheapening the articles they consume; that

competition even in the labour market is a source not of low but

of high wages, wherever the competition for labour exceeds the

competition of labour, as in America, in the colonies, and in the

skilled trades; and never could be a cause of low wages, save by

the overstocking of the labour market through the too great

numbers of the labourers' families; while, if the supply of

labourers is excessive, not even Socialism can prevent their

remuneration from being low. Besides, if association were

universal, there would be no competition between labourer and

labourer; and that between association and association would be

for the benefit of the consumers, that is, of the associations;

of the industrious classes generally. 

    I do not pretend that there are no inconveniences in

competition, or that the moral objections urged against it by

Socialist writers, as a source of jealousy and hostility among

those engaged in the same occupation, are altogether groundless.

But if competition has its evils, it prevents greater evils. As

M. Feugueray well says, 'La racine la plus profonde des maux et

des iniquites qui couvrent le monde industriel, n'est pas la

concurrence, mais bien l'exploitation due travail par le capital,

et la part enorme que les possesseurs des instruments de travail

prelevent sur les produits... Si la concurrence a beaucoup de

puissance pour le mal, elle n'a pas moins de fecondite pour le

bien, surtout en ce qui concerne le developpement des facultes

individuelles, et le succes des innovations.' It is the common

error of Socialists to overlook the natural indolence of mankind;

their tendency to be passive, to be the slaves of habit, to

persist indefinitely in a course once chosen. Let them once

attain any state of existence which they consider tolerable, and

the danger to be apprehended is that they will thenceforth

stagnate; will not exert themselves to improve, and by letting

their faculties rust, will lose even the energy required to

preserve them from deterioration. Competition may not be the best

conceivable stimulus, but it is at present a necessary one, and

no one can foresee the time when it will not be indispensable to

progress. Even confining ourselves to the industrial department,

in which, more than in any other, the majority may be supposed to

be competent judges of improvements; it would be difficult to

induce the general assembly of an association to submit to the

trouble and inconvenience of altering their habits by adopting

some new and promising invention, unless their knowledge of the

existence of rival associations made them apprehend that what

they would not consent to do, others would, and that they would

be left behind in the race. 

    Instead of looking upon competition as the baneful and

anti-social principle which it is held to be by the generality of

Socialists, I conceive that, even in the present state of society

and industry, every restriction of it is an evil, and every

extension of it, even if for the time injuriously affecting some

class of labourers, is always an ultimate good. To be protected

against competition is to be protected in idleness, in mental

dulness; to be saved the necessity of being as active and as

intelligent as other people; and if it is also to be protected

against being underbid for employment by a less highly paid class

of labourers, this is only where old custom, or local and partial

monopoly, has placed some particular class of artisans in a

privileged position as compared with the rest; and the time has

come when the interest of universal improvement is no longer

promoted by prolonging the privileges of a few. If the

slopsellers and others of their class have lowered the wages of

tailors, and some other artisans, by making them an affair of

competition instead of custom, so much the better in the end.

What is now required is not to bolster up old customs, whereby

limited classes of labouring people obtain partial gains which

interest them in keeping up the present organization of society,

but to introduce new general practices beneficial to all; and

there is reason to rejoice at whatever makes the privileged

classes of skilled artisans feel that they have the same

interests, and depend for their remuneration on the same general

causes, and must resort for the improvement of their condition to

the same remedies, as the less fortunately circumstanced and

comparatively helpless multitude. 





NOTES:



1. This passage is from the Prize Essay on the Causes and

Remedies of National Distress, by Mr Samuel Laing. The extracts

which it includes are from the Appendix to the Report of the

Children's Employment Commission. 



2. Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd edition, Ch. 26.



3. His establishment is 11, Rue Saint Georges.



4. It appears, however, that the workmen whom M. Leclaire had

admitted to this participation of profits, were only a portion

(rather less than half) of the whole number whom he employed.

This is explained by another part of his system. M. Leclaire pays

the full market rate of wages to all his workmen. The share of

profit assigned to them is, therefore, a clear addition to the

ordinary gains of their class, which he very laudably uses as an

instrument of improvement, by making it the reward of desert, or

the recompense for peculiar trust. 



5. For 27 September, 1845. 



6. L'Association Ouvriere Industrielle et Agricole, pp. 37-8.



7. 'Self-help by the People -- History of Co-operation in

Rochdale.' An instructive account of this and other co-operative

associations has also been written in the 'Companion to the

Almanack' for 1862, by Mr John Plummer, of Kettering; himself one

of the most inspiring examples of mental cultivation and high

principle in a self-instructed working man.



8. In this respect also the Rochdale Society has given an example

of reason and justice, worthy of the good sense and good feeling

manifested in their general proceedings. 'The Rochdale Story.'

says Mr Holyoake, 'renders incidental but valuable aid towards

realizing the civil independence of women. Women may be members

of this Store, and vote in its proceedings. Single and married

women join. Many married women become members because their

husbands will not take the trouble, and others join in it in

self-defence, to prevent the husband from spending their money in

drink. The husband cannot withdraw the savings at the Store

standing in the wife's name, unless she signs the order. 


