The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 4

Chapter 5

Consequences of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum

    1. The theory of the effect of accumulation on profits, laid
down in the preceding chapter, materially alters many of the
practical conclusions which might otherwise be supposed to follow
from the general principles of Political Economy, and which were,
indeed, long admitted as true by the highest authorities on the
subject. 
    It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in
countries where profits are low, the immense importance which
used to be attached by political economists to the effects which
an event or a measure of government might have in adding to or
subtracting from the capital of the country. We have now seen
that the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit of
accumulation is so active, and that the increase of capital has
proceeded at so rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two
counter-agencies, improvements in production, and increased
supply of cheap necessaries from abroad: and that unless a
considerable portion of the annual increase of capital were
either periodically destroyed, or exported for foreign
investment, the country would speedily attain the point at which
further accumulation would cease, or at least spontaneously
slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of invention in
the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a state
of things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the
country, unaccompanied by any increase of productive power, would
be but of transitory duration; since by depressing profits and
interest, it would either diminish by a corresponding amount the
savings which would be made from income in the year or two
following, or it would cause an equivalent amount to be sent
abroad, or to be wasted in rash speculations. Neither, on the
other hand, would a sudden abstraction of capital, unless of
inordinate amount, have any real effect in impoverishing the
country. After a few months or years, there would exist in the
country just as much capital as if none had been taken away. The
abstraction, by raising profits and interest, would give a fresh
stimulus to the accumulative principle, which would speedily fill
up the vacuum. Probably, indeed, the only effect that would
ensue, would be that for some time afterwards less capital would
be exported, and less thrown away in hazardous speculation. 
    In the first place, then, this view of things greatly
weakens, in a wealthy and industrious country, the force of the
economical argument against the expenditure of public money for
really valuable, even though industriously unproductive,
purposes. If for any great object of justice or philanthropic
policy, such as the industrial regeneration of Ireland, or a
comprehensive measure of colonization or of public education, it
were proposed to raise a large sum by way of loan, politicians
need not demur to the abstraction of so much capital, as tending
to dry up the permanent sources of the country's wealth, and
diminish the fund which supplies the subsistence of the labouring
population. The utmost expense which could be requisite for any
of these purposes, would not in all probability deprive one
labourer of employment, or diminish the next year's production by
one ell of cloth or one bushel of grain. In poor countries, the
capital of the country requires the legislator's sedulous care;
he is bound to be most cautious of encroaching upon it, and
should favour to the utmost its accumulation at home, and its
introduction from abroad. But in rich, populous, and highly
cultivated countries, it is not capital which is the deficient
element, but fertile land; and what the legislator should desire
and promote, is not a greater aggregate saving, but a greater
return to savings, either by improved cultivation, or by access
to the produce of more fertile lands in other parts of the globe.
In such countries, the government may take any moderate portion
of the capital of the country and expend it as revenue, without
affecting the national wealth: the whole being either drawn from
that portion of the annual savings which would otherwise be sent
abroad, or being subtracted from the unproductive expenditure of
individuals for the next year or two, since every million spent
makes room for another million to be saved before reaching the
overflowing point. When the object in view is worth the sacrifice
of such an amount of the expenditure that furnishes the daily
enjoyments of the people, the only well-grounded economical
objection against taking the necessary funds directly from
capital, consists of the inconveniences attending the process of
raising a revenue by taxation, to pay the interest of a debt. 
    The same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy
of regard, one of the common arguments against emigration as a
means of relief for the labouring class. Emigration, it is said,
can do no good to the labourers, if, in order to defray the cost,
as much must be taken away from the capital of the country as
from its population. That anything like this proportion could
require to be abstracted from capital for the purpose even of the
most extensive colonization, few, I should think, would now
assert: but even on that untenable supposition, it is an error to
suppose that no benefit would be conferred on the labouring
class. If one-tenth of the labouring people of England were
transferred to the colonies, and along with them one-tenth of the
circulating capital of the country, either wages, or profits, or
both, would be greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure of
capital and population upon the fertility of the land. There
would be a reduced demand for food: the inferior arable lands
would be thrown out of cultivation, and would become pasture; the
superior would be cultivated less highly, but with a greater
proportional return; food would be lowered in price, and though
money wages would not rise, every labourer would be considerably
improved in circumstances, an improvement which, if no increased
stimulus to population and fall of wages ensued, would be
permanent; while if there did, profits would rise, and
accumulation start forward so as to repair the loss of capital.
The landlords alone would sustain some loss of income; and even
they, only if colonization went to the length of actually
diminishing capital and population, but not if it merely carried
off the annual increase. 

    2. From the same principles we are now able to arrive at a
final conclusion respecting the effects which machinery, and
generally the sinking of capital for a productive purpose,
produce upon the immediate and ultimate interests of the
labouring class. The characteristic property of this class of
industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating capital
into fixed: and it was shown in the first Book, that in a country
where capital accumulates slowly, the introduction of machinery,
permanent improvements of land, and the like, might be, for the
time, extremely injurious; since the capital so employed might be
directly taken from the wages fund, the subsistence of the people
and the employment for labour curtailed, and the gross annual
produce of the country actually diminished. But in a country of
great annual savings and low profits, no such effects need be
apprehended. Since even the emigration of capital, or its
unproductive expenditure, or its absolute waste, do not in such a
country, if confined within any moderate bounds, at all diminish
the aggregate amount of the wages fund -- still less can the mere
conversion of a like sum into fixed capital, which continues to
be productive, have that effect. It merely draws off at one
orifice what was already flowing out at another; or if not, the
greater vacant space left in the reservoir does but cause a
greater quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of the
mischievous derangements of the money-market which were at one
time occasioned by the sinking of great sums in railways, I was
never able to agree with those who apprehended mischief, from
this source, to the productive resources of the country. Not on
the absurd ground (which to any one acquainted with the elements
of the subject needs no confutation) that railway expenditure is
a mere transfer of capital from hand to hand, by which nothing is
lost or destroyed. This is true of what is spent in the purchase
of the land; a portion too of what is paid to parliamentary
agents, counsel, engineers, and surveyors, is saved by those who
receive it, and becomes capital again: but what is laid out in
the bona fide construction of the railway itself, is lost and
gone; when once expended, it is incapable of ever being paid in
wages or applied to the maintenance of labourers again; as a
matter of account, the result is that so much food and clothing
and tools have been consumed, and the country has got a railway
instead. But what I would urge is, that sums so applied are
mostly a mere appropriation of the annual overflowing which would
otherwise have gone abroad, or been thrown away unprofitably,
leaving neither a railway nor any other tangible result. The
railway gambling of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from
a depression of profits and interest, and a rise of all public
and private securities, which would have engendered still wilder
speculations, and when the effects came afterwards to be
complicated by the scarcity of food, would have ended in a still
more formidable crisis than was experienced in the years
immediately following. In the poorer countries of Europe, the
rage for railway construction might have had worse consequences
than in England, were it not that in those countries such
enterprises are in a great measure carried on by foreign capital.
The railway operations of the various nations of the world may be
looked upon as a sort of competition for the overflowing capital
of the countries where profit is low and capital abundant, as
England and Holland. The English railway speculations are a
struggle to keep our annual increase of capital at home; those of
foreign countries are an effort to obtain it.(1*)
    It already appears from these considerations, that the
conversion of circulating capital into fixed, whether by
railways, or manufactories, or ships, or machinery, or canals, or
mines, or works of drainage and irrigation, is not likely, in any
rich country, to diminish the gross produce or the amount of
employment for labour. How much then is the case strengthened,
when we consider that these transformations of capital are of the
nature of improvements in production, which, instead of
ultimately diminishing circulating capital, are the necessary
conditions of its increase, since they alone enable a country to
possess a constantly augmenting capital without reducing profits
to the rate which would cause accumulation to stop. There is
hardly any increase of fixed capital which does not enable the
country to contain eventually a larger circulating capital, than
it otherwise could possess and employ within its own limits; for
there is hardly any creation of fixed capital which, when it
proves successful, does not cheapen the articles on which wages
are habitually expended. All capital sunk in the permanent
improvement of land, lessens the cost of food and materials;
almost all improvements in machinery cheapen the labourer's
clothing or lodging, or the tools with which these are made;
improvements in locomotion, such as railways, cheapen to the
consumer all things which are brought from a distance. All these
improvements make the labourers better off with the same money
wages, better off if they do not increase their rate of
multiplication. But if they do, and wages consequently fall, at
least profits rise, and, while accumulation receives an immediate
stimulus, room is made for a greater amount of capital before a
sufficient motive arises for sending it abroad. Even the
improvements which do not cheapen the things consumed by the
labourer, and which, therefore, do not raise profits nor retain
capital in the country, nevertheless, as we have seen, by
lowering the minimum of profit for which people will ultimately
consent to save, leave an ampler margin than previously for
eventual accumulation, before arriving at the stationary state. 
    We may conclude, then, that improvements in production, and
emigration of capital to the more fertile soils and unworked
mines of the uninhabited or thinly peopled parts of the globe, do
not, as appears to a superficial view, diminish the gross produce
and the demand for labour at home; but, on the contrary, are what
we have chiefly to depend on for increasing both, and are even
the necessary conditions of any great or prolonged augmentation
of either. Nor is it any exaggeration to say, that within
certain, and not very narrow, limits, the more capital a country
like England expends in these two ways, the more she will have
left. 

NOTES:

1. It is hardly needful to point out how fully the remarks in the
text have been verified by subsequent facts. The capital of the
country, far from having been in any degree impaired by the large
amount sunk in railway construction, was soon again overflowing. 
