The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 4

Chapter 3

Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population on Rents,
Profits, and Wages

    1. Continuing the inquiry into the nature of the economical
changes taking place in a society which is in a state of
industrial progress, we shall next consider what is the effect of
that progress on the distribution of the produce among the
various classes who share in it. We may confine our attention to
the system of distribution which is the most complex, and which
virtually includes all others - that in which the produce of
manufactures is shared between two classes, labourers and
capitalists, and the produce of agriculture among three,
labourers, capitalists, and landlords. 
    The characteristic features of what is commonly meant by
industrial progress, resolve themselves mainly into three,
increase of capital, increase of population, and improvements in
production; understanding the last expression in its widest
sense, to include the process of procuring commodities from a
distance, as well as that of producing them. The other changes
which take place are chiefly consequences of these; as, for
example, the tendency to a progressive increase of the cost of
production of food; arising from an increased demand, which may
be occasioned either by increased population, or by an increase
of capital and wages, enabling the poorer classes to increase
their consumption. It will be convenient to set out by
considering each of the three causes, as operating separately;
after which we can suppose them combined in any manner we think
fit. 
    Let us first suppose that population increases, capital and
the arts of production remaining stationary. One of the effects
of this change of circumstances is sufficiently obvious: wages
will fall; the labouring class will be reduced to an inferior
condition. The state of the capitalist, on the contrary, will be
improved. With the same capital, he can purchase more labour, and
obtain more produce. His rate of profit is increased. The
dependence of the rate of profits on the cost of labour is here
verified; for the labourer obtaining a diminished quantity of
commodities, and no alteration being supposed in the
circumstances of their production, the diminished quantity
represents a diminished cost. The labourer obtains not only a
smaller real reward, but the product of a smaller quantity of
labour. The first circumstance is the important one to himself,
the last to his employer. 
    Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the
value of any commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet shown
itself, why rent should be either raised or lowered. But if we
look forward another stage in the series of effects, we may see
our way to such a consequence. The labourers have increased in
numbers: their condition is reduced in the same proportion; the
increased numbers divide among them only the produce of the same
amount of labour as before. But they may economize in their other
comforts, and not in their food: each may consume as much food,
and of as costly a quality as previously; or they may submit to a
reduction, but not in proportion to the increase of numbers. On
this supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of real wages,
the increased population will require an increased quantity of
food. But since industrial skill and knowledge are supposed to be
stationary, more food can only be obtained by resorting to worse
land, or to methods of cultivation which are less productive in
proportion to the outlay. Capital for this extension of
agriculture will not be wanting; for though, by hypothesis, no
addition takes place to the capital in existence, a sufficient
amount can be spared from the industry which previously supplied
the other and less pressing wants which the labourers have been
obliged to curtail. The additional supply of food, therefore,
will be produced, but produced at a greater cost; and the
exchange value of agricultural produce must rise. It may be
objected, that profits having risen, the extra cost of producing
food can be defrayed from profits, without any increase of price.
It could, undoubtedly, but it will not; because if it did, the
agriculturist would be placed in an inferior position to other
capitalists. The increase of profits, being the effect of
diminished wages, is common to all employers of labour. The
increased expenses arising from the necessity of a more costly
cultivation, affect the agriculturist alone. For this peculiar
burthen he must be peculiarly compensated, whether the general
rate of profit be high or low. He will not submit indefinitely to
a deduction from his profits, to which other capitalists are not
subject. He will not extend his cultivation by laying out fresh
capital, unless for a return sufficient to yield him as high a
profit as could be obtained by the same capital in other
investments. The value, therefore, of his commodity will rise,
and rise in pro. portion to the increased cost. The farmer will
thus be indemnified for the burthen which is peculiar to himself,
and will also enjoy the augmented rate of profit which is common
to all capitalists.
    It follows, from principles with which we are already
familiar, that in these circumstances rent will rise. Any land
can afford to pay, and under free competition will pay, a rent
equal to the excess of its produce above the return to an equal
capital on the worst land, or under the least favourable
conditions. Whenever, therefore, agriculture is driven to descend
to worse land, or more onerous processes, rent rises. Its rise
will be twofold, for, in the first place, rent in kind, or corn
rent, will rise; and in the second, since the value of
agricultural produce has also risen, rent, estimated in
manufactured or foreign commodities (which is represented,
caeteris paribus, by money rent) will rise still more.
    The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly
said, it is necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn rises
in price, to repay with the ordinary profit the capital required
for producing additional corn on worse land or by more costly
processes. So far as regards this additional corn, the increased
price is but an equivalent for the additional expense; but the
rise, extending to all corn, affords on all, except the last
produced, an extra profit. If the farmer was accustomed to
produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and 120 quarters are now
required, of which the last twenty cannot be produced under 45s.,
he obtains the extra five shillings on the entire 120 quarters,
and not on the last twenty alone. He has thus an extra 25l.
beyond the ordinary profits, and this, in a state of free
competition, he will not be able to retain. He cannot however be
compelled to give it up to the consumer, since a less price than
45s. would be inconsistent with the production of the last twenty
quarters. The price, then, will remain at 45s., and the 25l. will
be transferred by competition not to the consumer but to the
landlord. A rise of rents is therefore inevitably consequent on
an increased demand for agricultural produce, when unaccompanied
by increased facilities for its production. A truth which, after
this final illustration, we may henceforth take for granted. 
    The new element now introduced - an increased demand for food
- besides occasioning an increase of rent, still further disturbs
the distribution of the produce between capitalists and
labourers. The increase of population will have diminished the
reward of labour: and if its cost is diminished as greatly as its
real remuneration, profits will be increased by the full amount.
If, however, the increase of population leads to an increased
production of food, which cannot be supplied but at an enhanced
cost of production, the cost of labour will not be so much
diminished as the real reward of it, and profits, therefore, will
not be so much raised. It is even possible that they might not be
raised at all. The labourers may previously have been so well
provided for, that the whole of what they now lose may be struck
off from their other indulgences, and they may not, either by
necessity or choice, undergo any reduction in the quantity or
quality of their food. To produce the food for the increased
number may be attended with such an increase of expense, that
wages, though reduced in quantity, may represent as great a cost,
may be the product of as much labour, as before, and the
capitalist may not be at all benefited. On this supposition the
loss to the labourer is partly absorbed in the additional labour
required for producing the last instalment of agricultural
produce; and the remainder is gained by the landlord, the only
sharer who always benefits by an increase of population. 

    2. Let us now reverse our hypothesis, and instead of
supposing capital stationary and population advancing, let us
suppose capital advancing and population stationary; the
facilities of production, both natural and acquired, being, as
before, unaltered. The real wages of labour, instead of falling,
will now rise; and since the cost of production of the things
consumed by the labourer is not diminished, this rise of wages
implies an equivalent increase of the cost of labour, and
diminution of profits. To state the same deduction in other
terms; the labourers not being more numerous, and the productive
power of their labour being only the same as before, there is no
increase of the produce; the increase of wages, therefore, must
be at the charge of the capitalist. It is not impossible that the
cost of labour might be increased in even a greater ratio than
its real remuneration. The improved condition of the labourers
may increase the demand for food. The labourers may have been so
ill off before, as not to have food enough; and may now consume
more: or they may choose to expend their increased means partly
or wholly in a more costly quality of food, requiring more labour
and more land; wheat, for example, instead of oats, or potatoes.
This extension of agriculture implies, as usual, a greater cost
of production and a higher price, so that besides the increase of
the cost of labour arising from the increase of its reward, there
will be a further increase (and an additional fall of profits)
from the increased costliness of the commodities of which that
reward consists. The same causes will produce a rise of rent.
What the capitalists lose, above what the labourers gain, is
partly transferred to the landlord, and partly swallowed up in
the cost of growing food on worse land or by a less productive
process. 

    3. Having disposed of the two simple cases, an increasing
population and stationary capital, and an increasing capital and
stationary population, we are prepared to take into consideration
the mixed case, in which the two elements of expansion are
combined, both population and capital increasing. If either
element increases faster than the other, the case is so far
assimilated with one or other of the two preceding: we shall
suppose them, therefore, to increase with equal rapidity; the
test of equality being, that each labourer obtains the same
commodities as before, and the same quantity of those
commodities. Let us examine what will be the effect, on rent and
profits, of this double progress. 
    Population having increased, without any falling off in the
labourer's condition, there is of course a demand for more food.
The arts of production being supposed stationary, this food must
be produced at an increased cost. To compensate for this greater
cost of the additional food, the price of agricultural produce
must rise. The rise extending over the whole amount of food
produced, though the increased expenses only apply to a part,
there is a greatly increased extra profit, which, by competition,
is transferred to the landlord. Rent will rise both in quantity
of produce and in cost; while wages, being supposed to be the
same in quantity, will be greater in cost. The labourer obtaining
the same amount of necessaries, money wages have risen; and as
the rise is common to all branches of production, the capitalist
cannot indemnify himself by changing his employment, and the loss
must be borne by profits.
    It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital
and population is to add to rent at the expense of profits:
though rent does not gain all that profits lose, a part being
absorbed in increased expenses of production, that is, in hiring
or feeding a greater number of labourers to obtain a given amount
of agricultural produce. By profits, must of course be understood
the rate of profit; for a lower rate of profit on a larger
capital may yield a larger gross profit, considered absolutely,
though a smaller in proportion to the entire produce. 
    This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time
counter. acted by improvements in production: whether arising
from increase of knowledge, or from an increased use of the
knowledge already possessed. This is the third of the three
elements, the effects of which on the distribution of the produce
we under. took to investigate; and the investigation will be
facilitated by supposing, as in the case of the other two
elements, that it operates, in the first instance, alone.

    4. Let us then suppose capital and population stationary, and
a sudden improvement made in the arts of production; by the
invention of more efficient machines, or less costly processes,
or by obtaining access to cheaper commodities through foreign
trade. 
    The improvement may either be in some of the necessaries or
indulgences which enter into the habitual consumption of the
labouring class; or it may be applicable only to luxuries
consumed exclusively by richer people. Very few, however, of the
great industrial improvements are altogether of this last
description. Agricultural improvements, except such as specially
relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar products, act
directly upon the principal objects of the labourer's
expenditure. The steam.engine and every other invention which
affords a manageable power, are applicable to all things, and of
course to those consumed by the labourer. Even the power-loom and
the spinning jenny, though applied to the most delicate fabrics,
are available no less for the coarse cottons and woollens worn by
the labouring class. All improvements in locomotion cheapen the
transport of necessaries as well as of luxuries. Seldom is a new
branch of trade opened, without, either directly or in some
indirect way, causing some of the articles which the mass of the
people consume to be either produced or imported at smaller cost.
It may safely be affirmed, therefore, that improvements in
production generally tend to cheapen the commodities on which the
wages of the labouring class are expended. 
    In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement are
those which the labourers generally do not consume, the
improvement has no effect in altering the distribution of the
produce. Those particular commodities, indeed, are cheapened;
being produced at less cost, they fall in value and in price, and
all who consume them, whether landlords, capitalists, or skilled
and privileged labourers, obtain increased means of enjoyment.
The rate of profits, however, is not raised. There is a larger
gross profit, reckoned in quantity of commodities. But the
capital also, if estimated in those commodities, has risen in
value. The profit is the same percentage on the capital that it
was before. The capitalists are not benefited as capitalists, but
as consumers. The landlords and the privileged classes of
labourers, if they are consumers of the same commodities, share
the same benefit. 
    The case is different with improvements which diminish the
cost of production of the necessaries of life, or of commodities
which enter habitually into the consumption of the great mass of
labourers. The play of the different forces being here rather
complex, it is necessary to analyse it with some minuteness. 
    As formerly observed, there are two kinds of agricultural
improvements. Some consist in a mere saving of labour, and enable
a given quantity of food to be produced at less cost, but not on
a smaller surface of land than before. Others enable a given
extent of land to yield not only the same produce with less
labour, but a greater produce; so that if no greater produce is
required, a part of the land already under culture may be
dispensed with. As the part rejected will be the least productive
portion, the market will thenceforth be regulated by a better
description of land than what was previously the worst under
cultivation. 
    To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light, we
must suppose it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no time
during its introduction, for any increase of capital or of
population. Its first effect will be a fall of the value and
price of agricultural produce. This is a necessary consequence of
either kind of improvement, but especially of the last. 
    An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the produce,
does not dispense with any portion of the land; the margin of
cultivation (as Dr Chalmers terms it) remains where it was;
agriculture does not recede, either in extent of cultivated land,
or in elaborateness of method: and the price continues to be
regarded by the same land, and by the same capital, as before.
But since that land or capital, and all other land or capital
which produces food, now yields its produce at smaller cost, the
price of food will fall proportionally. If one-tenth of the
expense of production has been saved, the price of produce will
fall one-tenth.
    But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind;
enabling the land to produce, not only the same corn with
one-tenth less labour, but a tenth more corn with the same
labour. Here the effect is still more decided. Cultivation can
now be contracted, and the market supplied from a smaller
quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface of land were of
the same average quality as the larger surface, the price would
fall one-tenth, because the same produce would be obtained with a
tenth less labour. But since the portion of land abandoned will
be the least fertile portion, the price of produce will
thenceforth be regulated by a better quality of land than before.
In addition, therefore, to the original diminution of one-tenth
in the cost of production, there will be a further diminution,
corresponding with the recession of the 'margin' of agriculture
to land of greater fertility. There will thus be a twofold fall
of price. 
    Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus
suddenly made, on the division of the produce; and in the first
place, on rent. By the former of the two kinds of improvement,
rent would be diminished. By the second, it would be diminished
still more. 
    Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation of
three qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and at an
equal expense, 100, 80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The price of
wheat will, on the average, be just sufficient to enable the
third quality to be cultivated with the ordinary profit. The
first quality therefore will yield forty and the second twenty
bushels of extra profit, constituting the rent of the landlord.
And first, let an improvement be made, which, without enabling
more corn to be grown, enables the same corn to be grown with
one-fourth less labour. The price of wheat will fall one.fourth,
and 8o bushels will be sold for the price for which 6o were sold
before. But the produce of the land which produces 6o bushels is
still required, and the expenses being as much reduced as the
price, that land can still be cultivated with the ordinary
profit. The first and second qualities will therefore continue to
yield a surplus of 40 and 20 bushels, and corn rent will remain
the same as before. But corn having fallen in price one.fourth,
the same corn rent is equivalent to a fourth less of money and of
all other commodities. So far, therefore, as the landlord expends
his income in manufactured or foreign products, he is one.fourth
worse off than before. His income as landlord is reduced to
three.quarters of its amount: it is only as a consumer of corn
that he is as well off. 
    If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in a
still greater ratio. Suppose that the amount of produce which the
market requires, can be grown not only with a fourth less labour,
but on a fourth less land. If all the land already in cultivation
continued to be cultivated, it would yield a produce much larger
than necessary. Land, equivalent to a fourth of the produce, must
now be abandoned; and as the third quality yielded exactly
one.fourth, (being 60 out of 240,) that quality will go out of
cultivation. The 240 bushels can now be grown on land of the
first and second qualities only; being, on the first, 100 bushels
plus one-third, or 133 1/3 bushels; on the second, 80 bushels
plus one-third, or 106 2/3 bushels; together 240. The second
quality of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and
regulates the price. Instead of 6o, it is sufficient if 106 2/3
bushels repay the capital with the ordinary profit. The price of
wheat will consequently fall, not in the ratio of 6o to 8o, as in
the other case, but in the ratio of 60 to 106 2/3 . Even this
gives an insufficient idea of the degree in which rent will be
affected. The whole produce of the second quality of land will
now be required to repay the expenses of production. That land,
being the worst in cultivation, will pay no rent. And the first
quality will only yield the difference between 133 1/3 bushels
and 106 2/3 , being 26 2/3 bushels instead of 40. The landlords
collectively will have lost 33 1/3 out of 60 bushels in corn rent
alone, while the value and price of what is left will have been
diminished in the ratio of 6o to 106 2/3.
    It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is
decidedly hostile to the sudden and general introduction of
agricultural improvements. This assertion has been called a
paradox, and made a ground for accusing its first promulgator,
Ricardo, of great intellectual perverseness, to say nothing
worse. I cannot discern in what the paradox consists; and the
obliquity of vision seems to me to be on the side of his
assailants. The opinion is only made to appear absurd by stating
it unfairly. If the assertion were that a landlord is injured by
the improvement of his estate, it would certainly be
indefensible; but what is asserted is, that he is injured by the
improvement of the estates of other people, although his own is
included. Nobody doubts that he would gain greatly by the
improvement if he could keep it to himself, and unite the two
benefits, an increased produce from his land, and a price as high
as before. But if the increase of produce took place
simultaneously on all lands, the price would not be as high as
before; and there is nothing unreasonable in supposing that the
landlords would be, not benefited, but injured. It is admitted
that whatever permanently reduces the price of produce diminishes
rent: and it is quite in accordance with common notions to
suppose that if, by the increased productiveness of land, less
land were required for cultivation, its value, like that of other
articles for which the demand had diminished, would fall. 
    I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really been
lowered by the progress of agricultural improvement; but why?
Because improvement has never in reality been sudden, but always
slow; at no time much outstripping, and often falling far short
of, the growth of capital and population, which tends as much to
raise rent, as the other to lower it, and which is enabled as we
shall presently see, to raise it much higher, by means of the
additional margin afforded by improvements in agriculture. First,
however, we must examine in what manner the sudden cheapening of
agricultural produce would affect profits and wages. 
    In the beginning, money wages would probably remain the same
as before, and the labourers would have the full benefit of the
cheapness. They would be enabled to increase their consumption
either of food or of other articles, and would receive the same
cost, and a greater quantity. So far, profits would be
unaffected. But the permanent remuneration of the labourers
essentially depends on what we have called their habitual
standard; the extent of the requirements which, as a class, they
insist on satisfying before they choose to have children. If
their tastes and requirements receive a durable impress from the
sudden improvement in their condition, the benefit to the class
will be permanent. But the same cause which enables them to
purchase greater comforts and indulgences with the same wages,
would enable them to purchase the same amount of comforts and
indulgences with lower wages; and a greater population may now
exist, without reducing the labourers below the condition to
which they are accustomed. Hitherto this and no other has been
the use which the labourers have commonly made of any increase of
their means of living; they have treated it simply as convertible
into food for a greater number of children. It is probable,
therefore, that population would be stimulated, and that after
the lapse of a generation the real wages of labour would  be no
higher than before the improvement: the reduction being partly
brought about by a fall of money wages, and partly through the
price of food, the cost of which, from the demand occasioned by
the increase of population, would be increased. To the extent to
which money wages fell, profits would rise: the capitalist
obtaining a greater quantity of equally efficient labour by the
same outlay of capital. We thus see that a diminution of the cost
of living, whether arising from agricultural improvements or from
the importation of foreign produce, if the habits and
requirements of the labourers are not raised, usually lowers
money wages and rent, and raises the general rate of profit. 
    What is true of improvements which cheapen the production of
food, is true also of the substitution of a cheaper for a more
costly variety of it. The same land yields to the same labour a
much greater quantity of human nutriment in the form of maize or
potatoes, than in the form of wheat. If the labourers were to
give up bread, and feed only on those cheaper products, taking as
their compensation not a greater quantity of other consumable
commodities, but earlier marriages and larger families, the cost
of labour would be much diminished, and if labour continued
equally efficient, profits would rise; while rent would be much
lowered, since food for the whole population could be raised on
half or a third part of the land now sown with corn. At the same
time, it being evident that land too barren to be cultivated for
wheat might be made in case of necessity to yield potatoes
sufficient to support the little labour necessary for producing
them, cultivation might ultimately descend lower, and rent
eventually rise higher, on a potato or maize system, than on a
corn system; because the land would be capable of feeding a much
larger population before reaching the limit of its powers. 
    If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is not in
the production of food, but of some manufactured article consumed
by the labouring class, the effect on wages and profits will at
first be the same; but the effect on rent very different. It will
not be lowered; it will even, if the ultimate effect of the
improvement is an increase of population, be raised: in which
last case profits will be lowered. The reasons are too evident to
require statement. 

    5. We have considered, on the one hand, the manner in which
the distribution of the produce into rent, profits, and wages, is
affected by the ordinary increase of population and capital, and
on the other, how it is affected by improvements in production,
and more especially in agriculture. We have found that the former
cause lowers profits, and raises rent and the cost of labour:
while the tendency of agricultural improvements is to diminish
rent; and all improvements which cheapen any article of the
labourer's consumption, tend to diminish the cost of labour and
to raise profits. The tendency of each cause in its separate
state being thus ascertained, it is easy to determine the
tendency of the actual course of things, in which the two
movements are going on simultaneously, capital and population
increasing with tolerable steadiness, while improvements in
agriculture are made from time to time, and the knowledge and
practice of improved methods become diffused gradually through
the community. 
    The habits and requirements of the labouring classes being
given (which determine their real wages), rents, profits, and
money wages at any given time, are the result of the composition
of these rival forces. If during any period agricultural
improvement advances faster than population, rent and money wages
during that period will tend downward, and profits upward. If
population advances more rapidly than agricultural improvement,
either the labourers will submit to a reduction in the quantity
or quality of their food, or if not, rent and money wages will
progressively rise, and profits will fall. 
    Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and
still slower diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur
only occasionally, while the increase of population and capital
are continuous agencies. It therefore seldom happens that
improvement, even during a short time, has so much the start of
population and capital as actually to lower rent, or raise the
rate of profits. There are many countries in which the growth of
population and capital is not rapid, but in these agricultural
improvement is less active still. Population almost everywhere
treads close on the heels of agricultural improvement, and
effaces its effects as fast as they are produced. 
    The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers rent,
is that it seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it from
growing dearer; and seldom, if ever, throws lands out of
cultivation, but only enables worse and worse land to be taken in
for the supply of an increasing demand. What is sometimes called
the natural state of a country which is but half cultivated,
namely, that the land is highly productive, and food obtained in
great abundance by little labour, is only true of unoccupied
countries colonized by a civilized people. In the United States
the worst land in cultivation is of a high quality (except
sometimes in the immediate vicinity of markets or means of
conveyance, where a bad quality is compensated by a good
situation); and even if no further improvements were made in
agriculture or locomotion, cultivation would have many steps yet
to descend, before the increase of population and capital would
be brought to a stand; but in Europe five hundred years ago,
though so thinly peopled in comparison to the present population,
it is probable that the worst land under the plough was, from the
rude state of agriculture, quite as unproductive as the worst
land now cultivated; and that cultivation had approached as near
to the ultimate limit of profitable tillage, in those times as in
the present. What the agricultural improvements since made have
really done is, by increasing the capacity of production of land
in general, to enable tillage to extend downwards to a much worse
natural quality of land than the worst which at that time would
have admitted of cultivation by a capitalist for profit; thus
rendering a much greater increase of capital and population
possible, and removing always a little and a little further off,
the barrier which restrains them; population meanwhile always
pressing so hard against the barrier, that there is never any
visible margin left for it to seize, every inch of ground made
vacant for it by improvement being at once filled up by its
advancing columns. Agricultural improvement may thus be
considered to be not so much a counterforce conflicting with
increase of population, as a partial relaxation of the bonds
which confine that increase. 
    The effects produced on the division of the produce by an
increase of production, under the joint influence of increase of
population and capital and improvements of agriculture, are very
different from those deduced from the hypothetical cases
previously discussed. In particular, the effect on rent is most
materially different. We remarked that - while a great
agricultural improvement made suddenly and universally would in
the first instance inevitably lower rent - such improvements
enable rent, in the progress of society, to rise gradually to a
much higher limit than it could otherwise attain, since they
enable a much lower quality of land to be ultimately cultivated.
But in the case we are now supposing, which nearly corresponds to
the usual course of things, this ultimate effect becomes the
immediate effect. Suppose cultivation to have reached, or almost
reached, the utmost limit permitted by the state of the
industrial arts, and rent, therefore, to have attained nearly the
highest point to which it can be carried by the progress of
population and capital, with the existing amount of skill and
knowledge. If a great agricultural improvement were suddenly
introduced, it might throw back rent for a considerable space,
leaving it to regain its lost ground by the progress of
population and capital, and afterwards to go on further. But,
taking place, as such improvement always does, very gradually, it
causes no retrograde movement of either rent or cultivation; it
merely enables the one to go on rising, and the other extending,
long after they must otherwise have stopped. It would do this
even without the necessity of resorting to a worse quality of
land; simply by enabling the lands already in cultivation to
yield a greater produce, with no increase of the proportional
cost. If by improvements of agriculture all the lands in
cultivation could be made, even with double labour and capital,
to yield a double produce, (supposing that in the meantime
population increased so as to require this double quantity) all
rents would be doubled. 
    To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical
example in a former page. Three qualities of land yield
respectively lOO, 8o, and 60 bushels to the same outlay on the
same extent of surface. If No. 1 could be made to yield 200, No.
2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double the expense, and
therefore without any increase of the cost of production, and if
the population, having doubled,required all this increased
quantity, the rent of No. 1 would be 80 bushels instead of 40,
and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20, while the price and value per
bushel would be the same as before: so that corn rent and money
rent would both be doubled. I need not point out the difference
between this result, and what we have shown would take place if
there were an improvement in production without the accompaniment
of an increased demand for food. 
    Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and in
the manner in which it generally takes place also immediately,
beneficial to the landlord. We may add, that when it takes place
in that manner, it is beneficial to no one else. When the demand
for produce fully keeps pace with the increased capacity of
production, food is not cheapened; the labourers are not, even
temporarily, benefited; the cost of labour is not diminished, nor
profits raised. There is a greater aggregate production, a
greater produce divided among the labourers, and a larger gross
profit; but the wages being shared among a larger population, and
the profits spread over a larger capital, no labourer is better
off, nor does any capitalist derive from the same amount of
capital a larger income. 
    The result of this long investigation may be summed up as
follows. The economical progress of a society constituted of
landlords, capitalists, and labourers, tends to the progressive
enrichment of the landlord class; while the cost of the
labourer's subsistence tends on the whole to increase, and
profits to fall. Agricultural improvements are a counteracting
force to the two last effects; but the first, though a case is
conceivable in which it would be temporarily checked, is
ultimately in a high degree promoted by those improvements; and
the increase of population tends to transfer all the benefits
derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords alone.
What other consequences, in addition to these, or in modification
of them, arise from the industrial progress of a society thus
constituted, I shall endeavour to show in the succeeding chapter.

