Principles of Economics
by John Stuart Mill

Book 4: Influence of the Progress of Society on Production and
Distribution

Chapter 1

General Characteristics of a Progressive State of Wealth

    1. The three preceding Parts include as detailed a view as
our limits permit, of what, by a happy generalization of a
mathematical phrase, has been called the Statics of the subject.
We have surveyed the field of economical facts, and have examined
how they stand related to one another as causes and effects; what
circumstances determine the amount of production, of employment
for labour, of capital and population; what laws regulate rent,
profits, and wages; under what conditions and in what proportions
commodities are interchanged between individuals and between
countries. We have thus obtained a collective view of the
economical phenomena of society, considered as existing
simultaneously. We have ascertained, to a certain extent, the
principles of their interdependence; and when the state of some
of the elements is known, we should now be able to infer, in a
general way, the contemporaneous state of most of the others. All
this, however, has only put us in possession of the economical
laws of a stationary and unchanging society. We have still to
consider the economical condition of mankind as liable to change,
and indeed (in the more advanced portions of the race, and in all
regions to which their influence reaches) as at all times
undergoing progressive changes. We have to consider what these
changes are, what are their laws, and what their ultimate
tendencies; thereby adding a theory of motion to our theory of
equilibrium -- the Dynamics of political economy to the Statics.
    In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the
operation of known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever may be the
other changes which the economy of society is destined to
undergo, there is one actually in progress, concerning which
there can be no dispute. In the leading countries of the world,
and in all others as they come within the influence of those
leading countries, there is at least one progressive movement
which continues with little interruption from year to year and
from generation to generation; a progress in wealth; an
advancement of what is called material prosperity. All the
nations which we are accustomed to call civilized, increase
gradually in production and in population: and there is no reason
to doubt, that not only these nations will for some time continue
so to increase, but that most of the other nations of the world,
including some not yet founded, will successively enter upon the
same career. It will, therefore, be our first object to examine
the nature and consequences of this progressive change; the
elements which constitute it, and the effects it produces on the
various economical facts of which we have been tracing the laws,
and especially on wages, profits, rents, values, and prices. 

    2. Of the features which characterize this progressive
economical movement of civilized nations, that which first
excites attention, through its intimate connexion with the
phenomena of Production, is the perpetual, and so far as human
foresight can extend, the unlimited, growth of man's power over
nature. Our knowledge of the properties and laws of physical
objects shows no sign of approaching its ultimate boundaries: it
is advancing more rapidly, and in a greater number of directions
at once, than in any previous age or generation, and affording
such frequent glimpses of unexplored fields beyond, as to justify
the belief that our acquaintance with nature is still almost in
its infancy. This increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more
rapidly than at any former period, converted, by practical
ingenuity, into physical power. The most marvellous of modern
inventions, one which realizes the imaginary feats of the
magician, not metaphorically but literally -- the
electro-magnetic telegraph -- sprang into existence but a few
years after the establishment of the scientific theory which it
realizes and exemplifies. Lastly, the manual part of these great
scientific operations is now never wanting to the intellectual :
there is no difficulty in finding or forming, in a sufficient
number of the working hands of the community, the skill requisite
for executing the most delicate processes of the application of
science to practical uses. From this union of conditions, it is
impossible not to look for. ward to a vast multiplication and
long succession of contrivances for economizing labour and
increasing its produce; and to an ever wider diffusion of the use
and benefit of those contrivances. 
    Another change, which has always hitherto characterized, and
will assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of
civilized society, is a continual increase of the security of
person and property. The people of every country in Europe, the
most back. ward as well as the most advanced, are, in each
generation, better protected against the violence and rapacity of
one another, both by a more efficient judicature and police for
the suppression of private crime, and by the decay and
destruction of those mischievous privileges which enabled certain
classes of the community to prey with impunity upon the rest.
They are also, in every generation, better protected, either by
institutions or by manners and opinion, against arbitrary
exercise of the power of government. Even in semi-barbarous
Russia, acts of spoliation directed against individuals, who have
not made themselves politically obnoxious, are not supposed to be
now so frequent as much to affect any person's feelings of
security. Taxation, in all European countries, grows less
arbitrary and oppressive, both in itself and in the manner of
levying it. Wars, and the destruction they cause, are now usually
confined, in almost every country, to those distant and outlying
possessions at which it comes into contact with savages. Even the
vicissitudes of fortune which arise from inevitable natural
calamities, are more and more softened to those on whom they
fall, by the continual extension of the salutary practice of
insurance. 
    Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing effects
is a great increase both of production and of accumulation.
Industry and frugality cannot exist, where there is not a
preponderant probability that those who labour and spare will be
permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this probability approaches to
certainty, the more do industry and frugality become pervading
qualities in a people. Experience has shown that a large
proportion of the results of labour and abstinence may be taken
away by fixed taxation, without impairing, and sometimes even
with the effect of stimulating, the qualities from which a great
production and an abundant capital take their rise. But those
qualities are not proof against a high degree of uncertainty. The
Government may carry off a part; but there must be assurance that
it will not interfere, nor suffer any one to interfere, with the
remainder. 
    One of the changes which most infallibly attend the progress
of modern society, is an improvement in the business capacities
of the general mass of mankind. I do not mean that the practical
sagacity of an individual human being is greater than formerly. I
am inclined to believe that economical progress has hitherto had
even a contrary effect. A person of good natural endowments, in a
rude state of society, can do a great number of things tolerably
well, has a greater power of adapting means to ends, is more
capable of extricating himself and others from an unforeseen
embarrassment, than ninety.nine in a hundred of those who have
known only what is called the civilized form of life. How far
these points of inferiority of faculties are compensated, and by
what means they might be compensated still more completely, to
the civilized man as an individual being, is a question belonging
to a different inquiry from the present. But to civilized human
beings collectively considered, the compensation is ample. What
is lost in the separate efficiency of each, is far more than made
up by the greater capacity of united action. In proportion as
they put off the qualities of the savage, they become amenable to
discipline; capable of adhering to plans concerted beforehand,
and about which they may not have been consulted; of
subordinating their individual caprice to a preconceived
determination, and performing severally the parts allotted to
them in a combined undertaking. Works of all sorts, impracticable
to the savage or the half-civilized, are daily accomplished by
civilized nations, not by any greatness of faculties in the
actual agents, but through the fact that each is able to rely
with certainty on the others for the portion of the work which
they respectively undertake. The peculiar characteristic, in
short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of co-operation; and
this, like other faculties, tends to improve by practice, and
becomes capable of assuming a constantly wider sphere of action.
    Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the
progressive change taking place in society, than the continual
growth of the principle and practice of cooperation. Associations
of individuals voluntarily combining their small contributions,
now perform works, both of an industrial and of many other
characters, which no one person or small number of persons are
rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance of which the
few persons capable of accomplishing them were formerly enabled
to exact the most inordinate remuneration. As wealth increases
and business capacity improves, we may look forward to a great
extension of establishments, both for industrial and other
purposes, formed by the collective contributions of large
numbers; establishments like those called by the technical name
of joint stock companies, or the associations less formally
constituted, which are so numerous in England, to raise funds for
public or philanthropic objects, or, lastly, those associations
of workpeople either for production, or to buy goods for their
common consumption, which are now specially known by the name of
cooperative societies. 
    The progress which is to be expected in the physical sciences
and arts, combined with the greater security of property, and
greater freedom in disposing of it, which are obvious features in
the civilization of modern nations, and with the more extensive
and more skilful employment of the joint.stock principle, afford
space and scope for an indefinite increase of capital and
production, and for the increase of population which is its
ordinary accompaniment. That the growth of population will
overpass the increase of production, there is not much reason to
apprehend; and that it should even keep pace with it, is
inconsistent with the supposition of any real improvement in the
poorest classes of the people. It is, however, quite possible
that there might be a great progress in industrial improvement,
and in the signs of what is commonly called national prosperity;
a great increase of aggregate wealth, and even, in some respects,
a better distribution of it; that not only the rich might grow
richer, but many of the poor might grow rich, that the
intermediate classes might become more numerous and powerful, and
the means of enjoyable existence be more and more largely
diffused, while yet the great class at the base of the whole
might increase in numbers only, and not in comfort nor in
cultivation. We must, therefore, in considering the effects of
the progress of industry, admit as a supposition, however greatly
we deprecate as a fact, an increase of population as
long-continued, as indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as the
increase of production and accumulation. 
    With these preliminary observations on the causes of change
at work in a society which is in a state of economical progress,
I proceed to a more detailed examination of the changes
themselves. 

