The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 2, Chapter 16

Of Rent

    1. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and
natural agents; the only person, besides the labourer and the
capitalist, whose consent is necessary to production, and who can
claim a share of the produce as the price of that consent, is the
person who, by the arrangements of society, possesses exclusive
power over some natural agent. The land is the principal of the
natural agents which are capable of being appropriated, and the
consideration paid for its use is called rent. Landed proprietors
are the only class, of any number or importance, who have a claim
to a share in the distribution of the produce, through their
ownership of something which neither they nor any one else have
produced. If there be any other cases of a similar nature, they
will be easily understood, when the nature and laws of rent are
comprehended.
    It is at once evident, that rent is the effect of a monopoly;
though the monopoly is a natural one, which may be regulated,
which may even be held as a trust for the community generally,
but which cannot be prevented from existing. The reason why
landowners are able to require rent for their land, is that it is
a commodity which many want, and which no one can obtain but from
them. If all the land of the country belonged to one person, he
could fix the rent at his pleasure. The whole people would be
dependent on his will for the necessaries of life, and he might
make what conditions he chose. This is the actual state of things
in those Oriental kingdoms in which the land is considered the
property of the state. Rent is then confounded with taxation, and
the despot may exact the utmost which the unfortunate cultivators
have to give. Indeed, the exclusive possessor of the land of a
country could not well be other than despot of it. The effect
would be much the same if the land belonged to so few people,
that they could, and did, act together as one man, and fix the
rent by agreement among themselves. This case, however, is
nowhere known to exist: and the only remaining supposition is
that of free competition; the landowners being supposed to be, as
in fact they are, too numerous to combine. 

    2. A thing which is limited in quantity, even though its
possessors do not act in concert, is still a monopolized article.
But even when monopolized, a thing which is the gift of nature,
and requires no labour or outlay as the condition of its
existence, will, if there be competition among the holders of it,
command a price, only if it exists in less quantity than the
demand. If the whole land of a country were required for
cultivation, all of it might yield a rent. But in no country of
any extent do the wants of the population require that all the
land, which is capable of cultivation, should be cultivated. The
food and other agricultural produce which the people need, and
which they are willing and able to pay for at a price which
remunerates the grower, may always be obtained without
cultivating all the land; sometimes without cultivating more than
a small part of it; the lands most easily cultivated being
preferred in a very early stage of society; the most fertile, or
those in the most convenient situations, in a more advanced
state. There is always, therefore, some land which cannot, in
existing circumstances, pay any rent; and no land ever pays rent,
unless, in point of fertility or situation, it belongs to those
superior kinds which exist in less quantity than the demand-which
cannot be made to yield all the produce required for the
community, unless on terms still less advantageous than the
resort to less favoured soils.
    There is land, such as the deserts of Arabia, which will
yield nothing to any amount of labour; and there is land, like
some of our hard sandy heaths, which would produce something,
but, in the present state of the soil, not enough to defray the
expenses of production. Such lands, unless by some application of
chemistry to agriculture still remaining to be invented, cannot
be cultivated for profit, unless some one actually creates a
soil, by spreading new ingredients over the surface, or mixing
them with the existing materials. If ingredients fitted for this
purpose exist in the subsoil, or close at hand, the improvement
even of the most unpromising spots may answer as a speculation:
but if those ingredients are costly, and must be brought from a
distance, it will seldom answer to do this for the sake of
profit, though the "magic of property" will sometimes effect it.
Land which cannot possibly yield a profit, is sometimes
cultivated at a loss, the cultivators having their wants
partially supplied from other sources; as in the case of paupers,
and some monasteries or charitable institutions, among which may
be reckoned the Poor Colonies of Belgium. The worst land which
can be cultivated as a means of subsistence, is that which will
just replace the seed, and the food of the labourers employed on
it, together with what Dr. Chalmers calls their secondaries; that
is, the labourers required for supplying them with tools, and
with the remaining necessaries of life. Whether any given land is
capable of doing more than this, is not a question of political
economy, but of physical fact. The supposition leaves nothing for
profits, nor anything for the labourers except necessaries: the
land, therefore, can only be cultivated by the labourers
themselves, or else at a pecuniary loss: and a fortiori, cannot
in any contingency afford a rent. The worst land which can be
cultivated as an investment for capital, is that which, after
replacing the seed, not only feeds the agricultural labourers and
their secondaries, but affords them the current rate of wages,
which may extend to much more than mere necessaries; and leaves
for those who have advanced the wages of these two classes of
labourers, a surplus equal to the profit they could have expected
from any other employment of their capital. Whether any given
land can do more than this, is not merely a physical question,
but depends partly on the market value of agricultural produce.
What the land can do for the labourers and for the capitalist,
beyond feeding all whom it directly or indirectly employs, of
course depends upon what the remainder of the produce can be sold
for. The higher the market value of produce, the lower are the
soils to which cultivation can descend, consistently with
affording to the capital employed, the ordinary rate of profit.
    As, however, differences of fertility slide into one another
by insensible gradations; and differences of accessibility, that
is, of distance from markets, do the same; and since there is
land so barren that it could not pay for its cultivation at any
price; it is evident that, whatever the price may be, there must
in any extensive region be some land which at that price will
just pay the wages of the cultivators, and yield to the capital
employed the ordinary profit, and no more. Until, therefore, the
price rises higher, or until some improvement raises that
particular land to a higher place in the scale of fertility, it
cannot pay any rent. It is evident, however, that the community
needs the produce of this quality of land; since if the lands
more fertile or better situated than it, could have sufficed to
supply the wants of society, the price would not have risen so
high as to render its cultivation profitable. This land,
therefore, will be cultivated; and we may lay it down as a
principle that so long as any of the land of a country which is
fit for cultivation, and not withheld from it by legal or other
factitious obstacles, is not cultivated, the worst land in actual
cultivation (in point of fertility and situation together) pays
no rent.

    3. If, then, of the land in cultivation, the part which
yields least return to the labour and capital employed on it
gives only the ordinary profit of capital, without leaving
anything for rent; a standard is afforded for estimating the
amount of rent which will be yielded by all other land. Any land
yields just as much more than the ordinary profits of stock, as
it yields more than what is returned by the worst land in
cultivation. The surplus is what the farmer can afford to pay as
rent to the landlord; and since, if he did not so pay it, he
would receive more than the ordinary rate of profit, the
competition of other capitalists, that competition which
equalizes the profits of different capitals, will enable the
landlord to appropriate it. The rent, therefore, which any land
will yield, is the excess of its produce, beyond what would be
returned to the same capital if employed on the worst land in
cultivation. This is not, and never was pretended to be, the
limit of metayer rents, or of cottier rents; but it is the limit
of farmers' rents. No land rented to a capitalist farmer will
permanently yield more than this; and when it yields less, it is
because the landlord foregoes a part of what, if he chose, he
could obtain.
    This is the theory of rent, first propounded at the end of
the last century by Dr. Anderson, and which, neglected at the
time, was almost simultaneously rediscovered, twenty years later,
by Sir Edward West, Mr. Malthus, and Mr. Ricardo. It is one of
the cardinal doctrines of political economy; and until it was
understood, no consistent explanation could be given of many of
the more complicated industrial phenomena. The evidence of its
truth will be manifested with a great increase of clearness, when
we come to trace the laws of the phenomena of Value and Price.
Until that is done, it is not possible to free the doctrine from
every difficulty which may present itself, nor perhaps to convey,
to those previously unacquainted with the subject, more than a
general apprehension of the reasoning by which the theorem is
arrived at. Some, however, of the objections commonly made to it,
admit of a complete answer even in the present stage of our
inquiries.
    It has been denied that there can be any land in cultivation
which pays no rent; because landlords (it is contended) would not
allow their land to be occupied without payment. Those who lay
any stress on this as an objection, must think that land of the
quality which can but just pay for its cultivation, lies together
in large masses, detached from any land of better quality. If an
estate consisted wholly of this land, or of this and still worse,
it is likely enough that the owner would not give the use of it
for nothing; he would probably (if a rich man) prefer keeping it
for other purposes, as for exercise, or ornament, or perhaps as a
game preserve. No farmer could afford to offer him anything for
it, for purposes of culture; though something would probably be
obtained for the use of its natural pasture, or other spontaneous
produce. Even such land, however, would not necessarily remain
uncultivated. It might be farmed by the proprietor; no unfrequent
case even in England. Portions of it might be granted as
temporary allotments to labouring families, either from
philanthropic motives, or to save the poor-rate; or occupation
might be allowed to squatters, free of rent, in the hope that
their labour might give it value at some future period. Both
these cases are of quite ordinary occurrence. So that even if an
estate were wholly composed of the worst land capable of
profitable cultivation, it would not necessarily lie uncultivated
because it could pay no rent. Inferior land, however, does not
usually occupy, without interruption, many square miles of
ground; it is dispersed here and there, with patches of better
land intermixed, and the same person who rents the better land,
obtains along with it inferior soils which alternate with it. He
pays a rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated on the
produce of these parts alone (however small a portion of the
whole) which are capable of returning more than the common rate
of profit. It is thus scientifically true, that the remaining
parts pay no rent.

    4. Let us, however, suppose that there were a validity in
this objection, which can by no means be conceded to it; that
when the demand of the community had forced up food to such a
price as would remunerate the expense of producing it from a
certain quantity of soil, it happened nevertheless that all the
soil of that quality was withheld from cultivation, by the
obstinacy of the owners in demanding a rent for it, not nominal,
nor trifling, but sufficiently onerous to be a material item in
the calculations of a farmer. What would then happen? Merely that
the increase of produce, which the wants of society required,
would for the time be obtained wholly (as it always is
partially), not by an extension of cultivation, but by an
increased application of labour and capital to land already
cultivated.
    Now we have already seen that this increased application of
capital, other things being unaltered, is always attended with a
smaller proportional return. We are not to suppose some new
agricultural invention made precisely at this juncture; nor a
sudden extension of agricultural skill and knowledge, bringing
into more general practice, just then, inventions already in
partial use. We are to suppose no change, except a demand for
more corn, and a consequent rise of its price. The rise of price
enables measures to be taken for increasing the produce, which
could not have been taken with profit at the previous price. The
farmer uses more expensive manures; or manures land which he
formerly left to nature; or procures lime or marl from a
distance, as a dressing for the soil; or pulverizes or weeds it
more thoroughly; or drains, irrigates, or subsoils portions of
it, which at former prices would not have paid the cost of the
operation; and so forth. These things, or some of them, are done,
when, more food being wanted, cultivation has no means of
expanding itself upon new lands. And when the impulse is given to
extract an increased amount of produce from the soil, the farmer
or improver will only consider whether the outlay he makes for
the purpose will be returned to him with the ordinary profit, and
not whether any surplus will remain for rent. Even, therefore, if
it were the fact, that there is never any land taken into
cultivation, for which rent, and that too of an amount worth
taking into consideration, was not paid; it would be true,
nevertheless, that there is always some agricultural capital
which pays no rent, because it returns nothing beyond the
ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the portion of
capital last applied-that to which the last addition to the
produce was due: or (to express the essentials of the case in one
phrase), that which is applied in the least favourable
circumstances. But the same amount of demand, and the same price,
which enable this least productive portion of capital barely to
replace itself with the ordinary profit, enable every other
portion to yield a surplus proportioned to the advantage it
possesses. And this surplus it is, which competition enables the
landlord to appropriate. The rent of all land is measured by the
excess of the return to the whole capital employed on it, above
what is necessary to replace the capital with the ordinary rate
of profit, or in other words, above what the same capital would
yield if it were all employed in as disadvantageous circumstances
as the least productive portion of it; whether that least
productive portion of capital is rendered so by being employed on
the worst soil, or by being expended in extorting more produce
from land which already yielded as much as it could be made to
part with on easier terms.
    It is not pretended that the facts of any concrete case
conform with absolute precision to this or any other scientific
principle. We must never forget that the truths of political
economy are truths only in the rough: they have the certainty,
but not the precision, of exact science. It is not, for example,
strictly true that a farmer will cultivate no land, and apply no
capital, which returns less than the ordinary profit. He will
expect the ordinary profit on the bulk of his capital. But when
he has cast in his lot with his farm, and bartered his skill and
exertions, once for all, against what the farm will yield to him,
he will probably be willing to expend capital on it (for an
immediate return) in any manner which will afford him a surplus
profit, however small, beyond the value of the risk, and the
interest which he must pay for the capital if borrowed, or can
get for it elsewhere if it is his own. But a new farmer, entering
on the land, would make his calculations differently, and would
not commence unless he could expect the full rate of ordinary
profit on all the capital which he intended embarking in the
enterprise. Again, prices may range higher or lower during the
currency of a lease, than was expected when the contract was
made, and the land, therefore, may be over or under-rented: and
even when the lease expires, the landlord may be unwilling to
grant a necessary diminution of rent, and the farmer, rather than
relinquish his occupation, or seek a farm elsewhere when all are
occupied, may consent to go on paying too high a rent.
Irregularities like these we must always expect; it is impossible
in political economy to obtain general theorems embracing the
complications of circumstances which may affect the result in an
individual case. When, too, the farmer class, having but little
capital, cultivate for subsistence rather than for profit, and do
not think of quitting their farm while they are able to live by
it, their rents approximate to the character of cottier rents,
and may be forced up by competition (if the number of competitors
exceeds the number of farms) beyond the amount which will leave
to the farmer the ordinary rate of profit. The laws which we are
enabled to lay down respecting rents, profits, wages, prices, are
only true in so far as the persons concerned are free from the
influence of any other motives than those arising from the
general circumstances of the case, and are guided, as to those,
by the ordinary mercantile estimate of profit and loss. Applying
this twofold supposition to the case of farmers and landlords, it
will be true that the farmer requires the ordinary rate of profit
on the whole of his capital; that whatever it returns to him
beyond this he is obliged to pay to the landlord, but will not
consent to pay more; that there is a portion of capital applied
to agriculture in such circumstances of productiveness as to
yield only the ordinary profits; and that the difference between
the produce of this, and any other capital of similar amount, is
the measure of the tribute which that other capital can and will
pay, under the name of rent, to the landlord. This constitutes a
law of rent, as near the truth as such a law can possibly be:
though of course modified or disturbed in individual cases, by
pending contracts, individual miscalculations, the influence of
habit, and even the particular feelings and dispositions of the
persons concerned.

    5. A remark is often made, which must not here be omitted,
though, I think, more importance has been attached to it than it
merits. Under the name of rent, many payments are commonly
included, which are not a remuneration for the original powers of
the land itself, but for capital expended on it. The additional
rent which land yields in consequence of this outlay of capital,
should, in the opinion of some writers, be regarded as profit,
not rent. But before this can be admitted, a distinction must be
made. The annual payment by a tenant almost always includes a
consideration for the use of the buildings on the farm; not only
barns, stables, and other outhouses, but a house to live in, not
to speak of fences and the like. The landlord will ask, and the
tenant give, for these, whatever is considered sufficient to
yield the ordinary profit, or rather (risk and trouble being here
out of the question) the ordinary interest, on the value of the
buildings: that is, not on what it has cost to erect them, but on
what it would now cost to erect others as good: the tenant being
bound, in addition, to leave them in as good repair as he found
them, for otherwise a much larger payment than simple interest
would of course be required from him. These buildings are as
distinct a thing from the farm as the stock or the timber on it;
and what is paid for them can no more be called rent of land,
than a payment for cattle would be, if it were the custom that
the landlord should stock the farm for the tenant. The buildings,
like the cattle, are not land, but capital, regularly consumed
and reproduced; and all payments made in consideration for them
are properly interest.
    But with regard to capital actually sunk in improvements, and
not requiring periodical renewal, but spent once for all in
giving the land a permanent increase of productiveness, it
appears to me that the return made to such capital loses
altogether the character of profits, and is governed by the
principles of rent. It is true that a landlord will not expend
capital in improving his estate, unless he expects from the
improvement an increase of income surpassing the interest of his
outlay. Prospectively, this increase of income may be regarded as
profit; but when the expense has been incurred, and the
improvement made, the rent of the improved land is governed by
the same rules as that of the unimproved. Equally fertile land
commands an equal rent, whether its fertility is natural or
acquired; and I cannot think that the incomes of those who own
the Bedford Level or the Lincolnshire Wolds ought to be called
profit and not rent because those lands would have been worth
next to nothing unless capital had been expended on them. The
owners are not capitalists, but landlords; they have parted with
their capital; it is consumed, destroyed; and neither is, nor is
to be, returned to them, like the capital of a farmer or
manufacturer, from what it produces. In lieu of it they now have
land of a certain richness, which yields the same rent, and by
the operation of the same causes, as if it had possessed from the
beginning the degree of fertility which has been artificially
given to it.
    Some writers, in particular Mr. H.C. Carey, take away, still
more completely than I have attempted to do, the distinction
between these two sources of rent, by rejecting one of them
altogether, and considering all rent as the effect of capital
expended. In proof of this, Mr. Carey contends that the whole
pecuniary value of all the land in any country, in England for
instance, or in the United States, does not amount to anything
approaching to the sum which has been laid out, or which it would
even now be necessary to lay out, in order to bring the country
to its present condition from a state of primaeval forest. This
startling statement has been seized on by M. Bastiat and others,
as a means of making out a stronger case than could otherwise be
made in defence of property in land. Mr. Carey's proposition, in
its most obvious meaning, is equivalent to saying, that if there
were suddenly added to the lands of England an unreclaimed
territory of equal natural fertility, it would not be worth the
while of the inhabitants of England to reclaim it: because the
profits of the operation would not be equal to the ordinary
interest on the capital expended. To which assertion if any
answer could be supposed to be required, it would suffice to
remark, that land not of equal but of greatly inferior quality to
that previously cultivated, is continually reclaimed in England,
at an expense which the subsequently accruing rent is sufficient
to replace completely in a small number of years. The doctrine,
moreover, is totally opposed to Mr. Carey's own economical
opinions. No one maintains more strenuously than Mr. Carey the
undoubted truth, that as society advances in population, wealth,
and combination of labour, land constantly rises in value and
price. This, however, could not possibly be true, if the present
value of land were less than the expense of clearing it and
making it fit for cultivation; for it must have been worth this
immediately after it was cleared; and according to Mr. Carey it
has been rising in value ever since.
    When, however, Mr. Carey asserts that the whole land of any
country is not now worth the capital which has been expended on
it, he does not mean that each particular estate is worth less
than what has been laid out in improving it, and that, to the
proprietors, the improvement of the land has been, in the final
result, a miscalculation. He means, not that the land of Great
Britain would not now sell for what has been laid out upon it,
but that it would not sell for that amount plus the expense of
making all the roads, canals, and railways. This is probably
true, but is no more to the purpose, and no more important in
political economy, than if the statement had been, that it would
not sell for the sums laid out on it plus the national debt, or
plus the cost of the French Revolutionary war, or any other
expense incurred for a real or imaginary public advantage. The
roads, railways, and canals were not constructed to give value to
land: on the contrary, their natural effect was to lower its
value, by rendering other and rival lands accessible: and the
landholders of the southern counties actually petitioned
Parliament against the turnpike roads on this very account.
    The tendency of improved communications is to lower existing
rents, by trenching on the monopoly of the land nearest to the
places where large numbers of consumers are assembled. Roads and
canals are not intended to raise the value of the land which
already supplies the markets, but (among other purposes) to
cheapen the supply, by letting in the produce of other and more
distant lands; and the more effectually this purpose is attained,
the lower rent will be. If we could imagine that the railways and
canals of the United States, instead of only cheapening
communication, did their business so effectually as to annihilate
cost of carriage altogether, and enable the produce of Michigan
to reach the market of New York as quickly and as cheaply as the
produce of Long Island-the whole value of all the land of the
United States (except such as lies convenient for building) would
be annihilated; or rather, the best would only sell for the
expense of clearing, and the government tax of a dollar and a
quarter per acre; since land in Michigan, equal to the best in
the United States, may be had in unlimited abundance by that
amount of outlay. But it is strange that Mr. Carey should think
this fact inconsistent with the Ricardo theory of rent. Admitting
all that he asserts, it is still true that as long as there is
land which yields no rent, the land which does yield rent, does
so in consequence of some advantage which it enjoys, in fertility
or vicinity to markets, over the other; and the measure of its
advantage is also the measure of its rent. And the cause of its
yielding rent, is that it possesses a natural monopoly; the
quantity of land, as favourably circumstanced as itself, not
being sufficient to supply the market. These propositions
constitute the theory of rent, laid down by Ricardo; and if they
are true, I cannot see that it signifies much whether the rent
which the land yields at the present time, is greater or less
than the interest of the capital which has been laid out to raise
its value, together with the interest of the capital which has
been laid out to lower its value.
    Mr. Carey's objection, however, has somewhat more of
ingenuity than the arguments commonly met with against the theory
of rent; a theorem which may he called the pons asinorum of
political economy, for there are, I am inclined to think, few
persons who have refused their assent to it except from not
having thoroughly understood it. The loose and inaccurate way in
which it is often apprehended by those who affect to refute it,
is very remarkable. Many, for instance, have imputed absurdity to
Mr. Ricardo's theory, because it is absurd to say that the
cultivation of inferior land is the cause of rent on the
superior. Mr. Ricardo does not say that it is the cultivation of
inferior land, but the necessity of cultivating it, from the
insufficiency of the superior land to feed a growing population:
between which and the proposition imputed to him there is no less
a difference than that between demand and supply. Others again
allege as an objection against Ricardo, that if all land were of
equal fertility, it might still yield a rent. But Ricardo says
precisely the same. He says that if all lands were equally
fertile, those which are nearer to their market than others, and
are therefore less burthened with cost of carriage, would yield a
rent equivalent to the advantage; and that the land yielding no
rent would then be, not the least fertile, but the least
advantageously situated, which the wants of the community
required to be brought into cultivation. It is also distinctly a
portion of Ricardo's doctrine, that even apart from differences
of situation, the land of a country supposed to be of uniform
fertility would, all of it, on a certain supposition, pay rent:
namely, if the demand of the community required that it should
all be cultivated, and cultivated beyond the point at which a
further application of capital begins to be attended with a
smaller proportional return. It would be impossible to show that,
except by forcible exaction, the whole land of a country can
yield a rent on any other supposition.

    6. After this view of the nature and causes of rent, let us
turn back to the subject of profits, and bring up for
reconsideration one of the propositions laid down in the last
chapter. We there stated, that the advances of the capitalist, or
in other words, the expenses of production, consist solely in
wages of labour; that whatever portion of the outlay is not
wages, is previous profit, and whatever is not previous profit,
is wages. Rent, however, being an element which it is impossible
to resolve into either profits or wages, we were obliged, for the
moment, to assume that the capitalist is not required to pay
rent-to give an equivalent for the use of an appropriated natural
agent: and I undertook to show in the proper place, that this is
an allowable supposition, and that rent does not really form any
part of the expenses of production, or of the advances of the
capitalist. The grounds on which this assertion was made are now
apparent. It is true that all tenant farmers, and many other
classes of producers, pay rent. But we have now seen, that
whoever cultivates land, paying a rent for it, gets in return for
his rent an instrument of superior power to other instruments of
the same kind for which no rent is paid. The superiority of the
instrument is in exact proportion to the rent paid for it. If a
few persons had steam-engines of superior power to all others in
existence, but limited by physical laws to a number short of the
demand, the rent which a manufacturer would be willing to pay for
one of these steam-engines could not he looked upon as an
addition to his outlay, because by the use of it he would save in
his other expenses the equivalent of what it cost him: without it
he could not do the same quantity of work, unless at an
additional expense equal to the rent. The same thing is true of
land. The real expenses of production are those incurred on the
worst land, or by the capital employed in the least favourable
circumstances. This land or capital pays, as we have seen, no
rent; but the expenses to which it is subject, cause all other
land or agricultural capital to be subjected to an equivalent
expense in the form of rent. Whoever does pay rent gets back its
full value in extra advantages, and the rent which he pays does
not place him in a worse position than, but only in the same
position as, his fellow-producer who pays no rent, but whose
instrument is one of inferior efficiency.
    We have now completed the exposition of the laws which
regulate the distribution of the produce of land, labour, and
capital, as far as it is possible to discuss those laws
independently of the instrumentality by which in a civilized
society the distribution is effected; the machinery of Exchange
and Price. The more complete elucidation and final confirmation
of the laws which we have laid down, and the deduction of their 
most important consequences, must be preceded by an explanation 
of the nature and working of that machinery-a subject so extensive
 and complicated as to require a separate Book.

