The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 2, Chapter 3

Of the Classes Among Whom the Produce is Distributed


    1. Private property being assumed as a fact, we have next to
enumerate the different classes of persons to whom it gives rise;
whose concurrence, or at least whose permission, is necessary to
production, and who are therefore able to stipulate for a share
of the produce. We have to inquire, according to what laws the
produce distributes itself among these classes, by the
spontaneous action of the interests of those concerned: after
which, a further question will be, what effects are or might be
produced by laws, institutions, and measures of government, in
superseding or modifying that spontaneous distribution.
    The three requisites of production, as has been so often
repeated, are labour, capital, and land: understanding by
capital, the means and appliances which are the accumulated
results of previous labour, and by land, the materials and
instruments supplied by nature, whether contained in the interior
of the earth, or constituting its surface. Since each of these
elements of production may be separately appropriated, the
industrial community may be considered as divided into
landowners, capitalists, and productive labourers. Each of these
classes, as such, obtains a share of the produce: no other person
or class obtains anything, except by concession from them. The
remainder of the community is, in fact, supported at their
expense, giving, if any equivalent, one consisting of
unproductive services. These three classes, therefore, are
considered in political economy as making up the whole community.

    2. But although these three sometimes exist as separate
classes, dividing the produce among them, they do not necessarily
or always so exist. The fact is so much otherwise, that there are
only one or two communities in which the complete separation of
these classes is the general rule. England and Scotland, with
parts of Belgium and Holland, are almost the only countries in
the world, where the land, capital, and labour employed in
agriculture, are generally the property of separate owners. The
ordinary case is, that the same person owns either two of these
requisites, or all three.
    The case in which the same person owns all three, embraces
the two extremes of existing society, in respect to the
independence and dignity of the labouring class. First, when the
labourer himself is the proprietor. This is the commonest case in
the Northern States of the American Union; one of the commonest
in France, Switzerland, the three Scandinavian kingdoms, and
parts of Germany;(1*) and a common case in parts of Italy and in
Belgium. In all these countries there are, no doubt, large landed
properties, and a still greater number which, without being
large, require the occasional or constant aid of hired labourers.
Much, however, of the land is owned in portions too small to
require any other labour than that of the peasant and his family,
or fully to occupy even that. The capital employed is not always
that of the peasant proprietor, many of these small properties
being mortgaged to obtain the means of cultivating; but the
capital is invested at the peasant's risk, and though he pays
interest for it, it gives to no one any right of interference,
except, perhaps, eventually to take possession of the land, if
the interest ceases to be paid.
    The other case in which the land, labour, and capital, belong
to the same person, is the case of slave countries, in which the
labourers themselves are owned by the landowner. Our West India
colonies before emancipation, and the sugar colonies of the
nations by whom a similar act of justice is still unperformed,
are examples of large establishments for agricultural and
manufacturing labour (the production of sugar and rum is a
combination of both) in which the land, the factories (if they
may be so called), the machinery, and the degraded labourers, are
all the property of a capitalist. In this case, as well as in its
extreme opposite, the case of the peasant proprietor, there is no
division of the produce.

    3. When the three requisites are not all owned by the same
person, it often happens that two of them are so. Sometimes the
same person owns the capital and the land, but not the labour.
The landlord makes his engagement directly with the labourer, and
supplies the whole or part of the stock necessary for
cultivation. This system is the usual one in those parts of
Continental Europe, in which the labourers are neither serfs on
the one hand, nor proprietors on the other. It was very common in
France before the Revolution, and is still practised in some
parts of that country, when the land is not the property of the
cultivator. It prevails generally in the level districts of
Italy, except those principally pastoral, such as the Maremma of
Tuscany and the Campagna of Rome. On this system the division of
the produce is between two classes, the landowner and the
labourer.
    In other cases again the labourer does not own the land, but
owns the little stock employed on it, the landlord not being in
the habit of supplying any. This system generally prevails in
Ireland. It is nearly universal in India, and in most countries
of the East; whether the government retains, as it generally
does, the ownership of the soil, or allows portions to become,
either absolutely or in a qualified sense, the property of
individuals. In India, however, things are so far better than in
Ireland, that the owner of land is in the habit of making
advances to the cultivators, if they cannot cultivate without
them. For these advances the native landed proprietor usually
demands high interest; but the principal landowner, the
government, makes them gratuitously, recovering the advance after
the harvest, together with the rent. The produce is here divided
as before, between the same two classes, the landowner and the
labourer.
    These are the principal variations in the classification of
those among whom the produce of agricultural labour is
distributed. In the case of manufacturing industry there never
are more than two classes, the labourers and the capitalists. The
original artisans in all countries were either slaves, or the
women of the family. In the manufacturing establishments of the
ancients, whether on a large or on a small scale, the labourers
were usually the property of the capitalist. In general, if any
manual labour was thought compatible with the dignity of a
freeman, it was only agricultural labour. The converse system, in
which the capital was owned by the labourer, was coeval with free
labour, and under it the first great advances of manufacturing
industry were achieved. The artisan owned the loom or the few
tools he used, and worked on his own account; or at least ended
by doing so, though he usually worked for another, first as
apprentice and next as journeyman, for a certain number of years
before he could be admitted a master. But the status of a
permanent journeyman, all his life a hired labourer and nothing
more, had no place in the crafts and guilds of the middle ages.
In country villages, where a carpenter or a blacksmith cannot
live and support hired labourers on the returns of his business,
he is even now his own workman; and shopkeepers in similar
circumstances are their own shopmen, or shopwomen. But wherever
the extent of the market admits of it, the distinction is now
fully established between the class of capitalists, or employers
of labour, and the class of labourers; the capitalists, in
general, contributing no other labour than that of direction and
superintendence.

NOTES:

1. "The Norwegian return" (say the Commissioners of Poor Law
Enquiry, to whom information was furnished from nearly every
country in Europe and America by the ambassadors and consuls
there) "states that at the last census in 1825, out of a
population of 1,051,318 persons, there were 59, 464 freeholders.
As by 59,464 freeholders must be meant 59,464 heads of families,
or about 300,000 individuals; the freeholders must form more than
a fourth of the whole population. Mr Macgregor states that in
Denmark (by which Zealand and the adjoining islands are probably
meant)  out of a population of 926,110, the number of landed
proprietors and farmers is 415,110, or nearly one-half. In
Sleswick-Holstein, out of a populationof 604,085, it is 196,017,
or about one-third. The proportion of proprietors and farmers to
the whole population is not given in Sweden; but the Stockholm
return estimates the average quantity of land annexed to a
labourer's habitation at from one to five acres; and through the
Gottenburg return gives a lower estimate, it adds, that the
peasants possess much of the land. In Wurtemburg we are told that
more than two-thirds of the labouring population are the
proprietors of their own habitations, and that almost all own at
least a garden of from three-quarters of an acre to an acre and a
half." In some of these statements, proprietors and farmers are
not discriminated; but "all the returns concur in stating the
number of day-labourers to be very small." -- (Preface to Foreign
Communications, p. xxxviii) As the general status of the
labouring people, the condition of a workman for hire is almost
peculiar to Great Britain.

