The Principles of Political Economy
by John Stuart Mill

Book 2, Chapter 7

Continuation of the Same Subject

    1. Before examining the influence of peasant properties on
the ultimate economical interests of the labouring class, as
determined by the increase of population, let us note the points
respecting the moral and social influence of that territorial
arrangement, which may be looked upon as established, either by
the reason of the case, or by the facts and authorities cited in
the preceding chapter.
    The reader new to the subject must have been struck with the
powerful impression made upon all the witnesses to whom I have
referred, by what a Swiss statistical writer calls the "almost
superhuman industry" of peasant proprietors.(1*) On this point at
least, authorities are unanimous. Those who have seen only one
country of peasant properties, always think the inhabitants of
that country the most industrious in the world. There is as
little doubt among observers, with what feature in the condition
of the peasantry this pre-eminent industry is connected. It is
the "magic of property" which, in the words of Arthur Young,
"turns sand into gold." The idea of property does not, however,
necessarily imply that there should be no rent, any more than
that there should be no taxes. It merely implies that the rent
should be a fixed charge, not liable to be raised against the
possessor by his own improvements, or by the will of a landlord.
A tenant at a quit-rent is, to all intents and purposes, a
proprietor; a copyholder is not less so than a freeholder. What
is wanted is permanent possession on fixed terms. "Give a man the
secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a
garden; give him a nine years' lease of a garden, and he will
convert it into a desert."
    The details which have been cited, and those, still more
minute, to be found in the same authorities, concerning the
habitually elaborate system of cultivation, and the thousand
devices of the peasant proprietor for making every superfluous
hour and odd moment instrumental to some increase in the future
produce and value of the land, will explain what has been said in
a previous chapter(2*) respecting the far larger gross produce
which, with anything like parity of agricultural knowledge, is
obtained from the same quality of soil on small farms, at least
when they are the property of the cultivator. The treatise on
"Flemish Husbandry" is especially instructive respecting the
means by which untiring industry does more than outweigh
inferiority of resources, imperfection of implements, and
ignoranCe of scientific theories. The peasant cultivation of
Flanders and italy is affirmed to produce heavier crops, in equal
circumstances of soil, than the best cultivated districts of
Scotland and England. it produces them, no doubt, with an amount
of labour which, if paid for by an employer, would make the cost
to him more than equivalent to the benefit; but to the peasant it
is not cost, it is the devotion of time which he can spare, to a
favourite pursuit, if we should not rather say a ruling
passion.(3*)
    We have seen, too, that it is not solely by superior exertion
that the Flemish cultivators succeed in obtaining these brilliant
results. The same motive which gives such intensity to their
industry, placed them earlier in possession of an amount of
agricultural knowledge, not attained until much later in
countries where agriculture was carried on solely by hired
labour. An equally high testimony is borne by M. de Lavergne(4*)
to the agricultural skill of the small proprietors in those parts
of France to which the petite culture is really suitable. "In the
rich plains of Flanders, on the banks of the Rhine, the Garonne,
the Charente, the Rhone, all the practices which fertilize the
land and increase the productiveness of labour are known to the
very smallest cultivators, and practised by them, however
considerable may be the advances which they require. In their
hands, abundant manures, collected at great cost, repair and
incessantly increase the fertility of the soil, in spite of the
activity of cultivation. The races of cattle are superior, the
crops magnificent. Tobacco, flax, colza, madder, beetroot, in
some places; in others, the vine, the olive, the plum, the
mulberry, only yield their abundant treasures to a population of
industrious labourers. Is it not also to the petite culture that
we are indebted for most of the garden produce obtained by dint
of great outlay in the neighbourhood of Paris?"

    2. Another aspect of peasant properties, in which it is
essential that they should be considered, is that of an
instrument of popular education. Books and schooling are
absolutely necessary to education; but not all-sufficient. The
mental faculties will he most developed where they are most
exercised; and what gives more exercise to them than the having a
multitude of interests, none of which can be neglected, and which
can be provided for only by varied efforts of will and
intelligence? Some of the disparagers of small properties lay
great stress on the cares and anxieties which beset the peasant
proprietor of the Rhineland or Flanders. It is precisely those
cares and anxieties which tend to make him a superior being to an
English day-labourer. It is, to be sure, rather abusing the
privileges of fair argument to represent the condition of a
day-labourer as not an anxious one. I can conceive no
circumstances in which he is free from anxiety, where there is a
possibility of being out of employment; unless he has access to a
profuse dispensation of parish pay, and no shame or reluctance in
demanding it. The day-labourer has, in the existing state of
society and population, many of the anxieties which have not an
invigorating effect on the mind, and none of those which have.
The position of the peasant proprietor of Continental Europe is
the reverse. From the anxiety which chills and paralyses-the
uncertainty of having food to eat-few persons are more exempt: it
requires as rare a concurrence of circumstances as the potato
failure combined with an universal bad harvest, to bring him
within reach of that danger. His anxieties are the ordinary
vicissitudes of more and less; his cares are that he takes his
fair share of the business of life; that he is a free human
being, and not perpetually a child, which seems to be the
approved condition of the labouring classes according to the
prevailing philanthropy. He is no longer a being of a different
order from the middle classes; he has pursuits and objects like
those which occupy them, and give to their intellects the
greatest part of such cultivation as they receive. If there is a
first principle in intellectual education, it is this-that the
discipline which does good to the mind is that in which the mind
is active, not that in which it is passive. The secret for
developing the faculties is to give them much to do, and much
inducement to do it. This detracts nothing from the importance,
and even necessity, of other kinds of mental cultivation. The
possession of property will not prevent the peasant from being
coarse, selfish, and narrow-minded. These things depend on other
influences, and other kinds of instruction. But this great
stimulus to one kind of mental activity, in no way impedes any
other means of intellectual development. On the contrary, by
cultivating the habit of turning to practical use every fragment
of knowledge acquired, it helps to render that schooling and
reading fruitful, which without some such auxiliary influence are
in too many cases like seed thrown on a rock.

    3. It is not on the intelligence alone, that the situation of
a peasant proprietor exercises an improving influence. It is no
less propitious to the moral virtues of prudence, temperance, and
self-control. Day-labourers, where the labouring class mainly
consists of them, are usually improvident: they spend carelessly
to the full extent of their means, and let the future shift for
itself. This is so notorious, that many persons strongly
interested in the welfare of the labouring classes, hold it as a
fixed opinion that an increase of wages would do them little
good, unless accompanied by at least a corresponding improvement
in their tastes and habits. The tendency of peasant proprietors,
and of those who hope to become proprietors, is to the contrary
extreme; to take even too much thought for the morrow. They are
oftener accused of penuriousness than of prodigality. They deny
themselves reasonable indulgences, and live wretchedly in order
to economize. In Switzerland almost everybody saves, who has any
means of saving; the case of the Flemish farmers has been already
noticed: among the French, though a pleasure-loving and reputed
to be a self-indulgent people, the spirit of thrift is diffused
through the rural population in a manner most gratifying as a
whole, and which in individual instances errs rather on the side
of excess than defect. Among those who, from the hovels in which
they live, and the herbs and roots which constitute their diet,
are mistaken by travellers for proofs and specimens of general
indigence, there are numbers who have hoards in leathern bags,
consisting of sums, in five franc pieces, which they keep by them
perhaps for a whole generation, unless brought out to be expended
in their most cherished gratification the purchase of land. If
there is a moral inconvenience attached to a state of society in
which the peasantry have land, it is the danger of their being
too careful of their pecuniary concerns; of its making them
crafty, and "calculating" in the objectionable sense. The French
peasant is no simple countryman, no downright "paysan du Danube;"
both in fact and in fiction he is now "le rusé paysan." That is
the stage which he has reached in the progressive development
which the constitution of things has imposed on human
intelligence and human emancipation. But some excess in this
direction is a small and a passing evil compared with
recklessness and improvidence in the labouring classes, and a
cheap price to pay for the inestimable worth of the virtue of
self-dependence, as the general characteristic of a people: a
virtue which is one of the first conditions of excellence in the
human character -- the stock on which if the other virtues are
not grafted, they have seldom any firm root; a quality
indispensable in the case of a labouring class, even to any
tolerable degree of physical comfort; and by which the peasantry
of France, and of most European countries of peasant proprietors,
are distinguished beyond any other labouring population.

    4. Is it likely that a state of economical relations so
conducive to frugality and prudence in every other respect,
should be prejudicial to it in the cardinal point of increase of
population? That it is so, is the opinion expressed by most of
those English political economists who have written anything
about the matter. Mr. M'Culloch's opinion is well known. Mr.
Jones affirms,(5*) that a "peasant population raising their own
wages from the soil, and consuming them in kind, are universally
acted upon very feebly by internal checks, or by motives
disposing them to restraint. The consequence is, that unless some
external cause, quite independent of their will, forces such
peasant cultivators to slacken their rate of increase, they will,
in a limited territory, very rapidly approach a state of want and
penury, and will be stopped at last only by the physical
impossibility of procuring subsistence." He elsewhere(6*) speaks
of such a peasantry as "exactly in the condition in which the
animal disposition to increase their numbers is checked by the
fewest of those balancing motives and desires which regulate the
increase of superior ranks or more civilized people." The "causes
of this peculiarity", Mr. Jones promised to point out in a
subsequent work, which never made its appearance. I am totally
unable to conjecture from what theory of human nature, and of the
motives which influence human conduct, he would have derived
them. Arthur Young assumes the same "peculiarity" as a fact; but,
though not much in the habit of qualifying his opinions, he does
not push his doctrine to so violent an extreme as Mr. Jones;
having, as we have seen, himself testified to various instances
in which peasant populations such as Mr. Jones speaks of, were
not tending to "a state of want and penury", and were in no
danger whatever of coming into contact with "physical
impossibility of procuring subsistence."
    That there should be discrepancy of experience on this
matter, is easily to be accounted for. Whether the labouring
people live by land or by wages, they have always hitherto
multiplied up to the limit set by their habitual standard of
comfort. When that standard was low, not exceeding a scanty
subsistence, the size of properties, as well as the rate of
wages, has been kept down to what would barely support life.
Extremely low ideas of what is necessary for subsistence, are
perfectly compatible with peasant properties; and if a people
have always been used to poverty, and habit has reconciled them
to it, there will be over-population, and excessive subdivision
of land. But this is not to the purpose. The true question is,
supposing a peasantry to possess land not insufficient but
sufficient for their comfortable support, are they more, or less,
likely to fall from this state of comfort through improvident
multiplication, than if they were living in an equally
comfortable manner as hired labourers? All à priori
considerations are in favour of their being less likely. The
dependence of wages on population is a matter of speculation and
discussion. That wages would fall if population were much
increased is often a matter of real doubt, and always a thing
which requires some exercise of the thinking faculty for its
intelligent recognition. But every peasant can satisfy himself
from evidence which he can fully appreciate, whether his piece of
land can be made to support several families in the same comfort
as it supports one. Few people like to leave to their children a
worse lot in life than their own. The parent who has land to
leave, is perfectly able to judge whether the children can live
upon it or not: but people who are supported by wages, see no
reason why their sons should be unable to support themselves in
the same way, and trust accordingly to chance. "In even the most
useful and necessary arts and manufactures," says Mr. Laing,(7*)
"the demand for labourers is not a seen, known, steady, and
appreciable demand: but it is so in husbandry" under small
properties. "The labour to be done, the subsistence that labour
will produce out of his portion of land, are seen and known
elements in a man's calculation upon his means of subsistence.
Can his square of land, or can it not, subsist a family? Can he
marry or not? are questions which every man can answer without
delay, doubt, or speculation. It is the depending on chance,
where judgment has nothing clearly set before it, that causes
reckless, improvident marriages in the lower, as in the higher
classes, and produces among us the evils of over-population; and
chance necessarily enters into every man's calculations, when
certainty is removed altogether; as it is, where certain
subsistence is, by our distribution of property, the lot of but a
small portion instead of about two-thirds of the people."
    There never has been a writer more keenly sensible of the
evils brought upon the labouring classes by excess of population,
than Sismondi, and this is one of the grounds of his earnest
advocacy of peasant properties. He had ample opportunity, in more
countries than one, for judging of their effect on population.
Let us see his testimony. "In the countries in which cultivation
by small proprietors still continues, population increases
regularly and rapidly until it has attained its natural limits;
that is to say, inheritances continue to be divided and
subdivided among several sons, as long as, by an increase of
labour, each family can extract an equal income from a smaller
portion of land. A father who possessed a vast extent of natural
pasture, divides it among his sons, and they turn it into fields
and meadows; his sons divide it among their sons, who abolish
fallows: each improvement in agricultural knowledge admits of
another step in the subdivision of property. But there is no
danger lest the proprietor should bring up his children to make
beggars of them. He knows exactly what inheritance he has to
leave them; he knows that the law will divide it equally among
them; he sees the limit beyond which this division would make
them descend from the rank which he has himself filled, and a
just family pride, common to the peasant and to the nobleman,
makes him abstain from summoning into life, children for whom he
cannot properly provide. If more are born, at least they do not
marry, or they agree among themselves, which of several brothers
shall perpetuate the family. It is not found that in the Swiss
Cantons, the patrimonies of the peasants are ever so divided as
to reduce them below an honourable competence; though the habit
of foreign service, by opening to the children a career
indefinite and uncalculable, sometimes calls forth a
super-abundant population."(8*)
    There is similar testimony respecting Norway. Though there is
no law or custom of primogeniture, and no manufactures to take
off a surplus population, the subdivision of property is not
carried to an injurious extent. "The division of the land among
children," says Mr. Laing,(9*) "appears not, during the thousand
years it has been in operation, to have had the effect of
reducing the landed properties to the minimum size that will
barely support human existence. I have counted from
five-and-twenty to forty cows upon farms, and that in a country
in which the farmer must, for at least seven months in the year,
have winter provender and houses provided for all the cattle. It
is evident that some cause or other, operating on aggregation of
landed property, counteracts the dividing effects of partition
among children. That cause can be no other than what I have long
conjectured would be effective in such a social arrangement; viz.
that in a country where land is held, not in tenancy merely, as
in Ireland, but in full ownership, its aggregation by the deaths
of co-heirs, and by the marriages of the female heirs among the
body of landholders, will balance its subdivision by the equal
succession of children. The whole mass of property will, I
conceive, be found in such a state of society to consist of as
many estates of the class of 10001., as many of 100l., as many of
10l., a year, at one period as another." That this should happen,
supposes diffused through society a very efficacious prudential
check to population; and it is reasonable to give part of the
credit of this prudential restraint to the peculiar adaptation of
the peasant-proprietary system for fostering it.
    "In some parts of Switzerland," says Mr. Kay,(10*) "as in the
canton of Argovie for instance, a peasant never marries before he
attains the age of twenty-five years, and generally much later in
life; and in that canton the women very seldom marry before they
have attained the age of thirty.... Nor do the division of land
and the cheapness of the mode of conveying it from one man to
another, encourage the providence of the labourers of the rural
districts only. They act in the same manner, though perhaps. in a
less degree, upon the labourers of the smaller towns. In the
smaller provincial towns it is customary for a labourer to own a
small plot of ground outside the town. This plot he cultivates in
the evening as his kitchen garden. He raises in it vegetables and
fruits for the use of his family during the winter. After his
day's work is over, he and his family repair to the garden for a
short time, which they spend in planting, sowing, weeding, or
preparing for sowing or harvest, according to the season. The
desire to become possessed of one of these gardens operates very
strongly in strengthening prudential habits and in restraining
improvident marriages. Some of the manufacturers in the canton of
Argovie told me that a townsman was seldom contented until he had
bought a garden, or a garden and house, and that the town
labourers generally deferred their marriages for some years, in
order to save enough to purchase either one or both of these
luxuries."
    The same writer shows by statistical evidence(11*) that in
Prussia the average age of marriage is not only much later than
in England, but "is gradually becoming later than it was
formerly," while at the same time "fewer illegitimate children
are born in Prussia than in any other of the European countries."
"Wherever I travelled," says Mr. Kay,(12*) "in North Germany and
Switzerland, I was assured by all that the desire to obtain land,
which was felt by all the peasants, was acting as the strongest
possible check upon undue increase of population."(13*)
    In Flanders, according to Mr. Fauche, the British Consul at
Ostend,(14*) "farmers' sons and those who have the means to
become farmers will delay their marriage until they get
possession of a farm." Once a farmer, the next object is to
become a proprietor. "The first thing a Dane does with his
savings," says Mr. Browne, the Consul at Copenhagen,(15*) "is to
purchase a clock, then a horse and cow, which he hires out, and
which pays a good interest. Then his ambition is to become a
petty proprietor, and this class of persons is better off than
any in Denmark. Indeed, I know of no people in any country who
have more easily within their reach all that is really necessary
for life than this class, which is very large in comparison with
that of labourers."
    But the experience which most decidedly contradicts the
asserted tendency of peasant proprietorship to produce excess of
population, is the case of France. In that country the experiment
is not tried in the most favourable circumstances, a large
proportion of the properties being too small. The number of
landed proprietors in France is not exactly ascertained, but on
no estimate does it fall much short of five millions; which, on
the lowest calculation of the number of persons of a family (and
for France it ought to be a low calculation), shows much more
than half the population as either possessing, or entitled to
inherit, landed property. A majority of the properties are so
small as not to afford a subsistence to the proprietors, of whom,
according to some computations, as many as three millions are
obliged to eke out their means of support either by working for
hire, or by taking additional land, generally on metayer tenure.
When the property possessed is not sufficient to relieve the
possessor from dependence on wages, the condition of a proprietor
loses much of its characteristic efficacy as a check to
over-population: and if the prediction so often made in England
had been realized, and France had become a "pauper warren," the
experiment would have proved nothing against the tendencies of
the same system of agricultural economy in other circumstances.
But what is the fact? That the rate of increase of the French
population is the slowest in Europe. During the generation which
the Revolution raised from the extreme of hopeless wretchedness
to sudden abundance, a great increase of population took place.
But a generation has grown up, which, having been born in
improved circumstances, has not learnt to be miserable; and upon
them the spirit of thrift operates most conspicuously, in keeping
the increase of population within the increase of national
wealth. In a table, drawn up by Professor Rau,(16*) of the rate
of annual increase of the populations of various countries, that
of France, from 1817 to 1827, is stated at 63/100 per cent, that
of England during a similar decennial period being 1 6/10
annually, and that of the United States nearly 3. According to
the Official returns as analysed by M. Legoyt,(17*) the increase
of the population, which from 1801 to 1806 was at the rate of
1.28 per cent annually, averaged only 0.47 per cent from 1806 to
1831; from 1831 to 1836 it averaged 0.60 per cent; from 1836 to
1841, 0.41 per cent, and from 1841 to l846, 0.68 per cent.(18*)
At the census of l851 the rate of annual increase shown was only
1.08 per cent in the five years, or 0.21 annually; and at the
census of 1856 only 0.71 per cent in five years, or 0.14
annually. so that, in the words of M. de Lavergne, "la population
ne s'accroît presque plus en France."(19*) Even this slow
increase is wholly the effect of a diminution of deaths; the
number of births not increasing at all, while the proportion of
the births to the population is constantly diminishing.(20*) This
slow growth of the numbers of the people, while capital increases
much more rapidly, has caused a noticeable improvement in the
condition of the labouring class. The circumstances of that
portion of the class who are landed proprietors are not easily
ascertained with precision, being of course extremely variable;
but the mere labourers, who derived no direct benefit from the
changes in landed property which took place at the Revolution,
have unquestionably much improved in condition since that
period.(21*) Dr. Rau testifies to a similar fact in the case of
another country in which the subdivision of the land is probably
excessive, the Palatinate.(22*)
    I am not aware of a single authentic instance which supports
the assertion that rapid multiplication is promoted by peasant
properties. Instances may undoubtedly be cited of its not being
prevented by them, and one of the principal of these is Belgium;
the prospects of which, in respect to population, are at present
a matter of considerable uncertainty. Belgium has the most
rapidly increasing population on the Continent; and when the
circumstances of the country require, as they must soon do, that
this rapidity should be checked, there will be a considerable
strength of existing habit to be broken through. One of the
unfavourable circumstances is the great power possessed over the
minds of the people by the Catholic priesthood, whose influence
is everywhere strongly exerted against restraining population. As
yet, however, it must be remembered that the indefatigable
industry and great agricultural skill of the people have rendered
the existing rapidity of increase practically innocuous; the
great number of large estates still undivided affording by their
gradual dismemberment, a resource for the necessary augmentation
of the gross produce; and there are, besides, many large
manufacturing towns, and mining and coal districts, which attract
and employ a considerable portion of the annual increase of
population.

    5. But even where peasant properties are accompanied by an
excess of numbers, this evil is not necessarily attended with the
additional economical disadvantage of too great a subdivision of
the land. It does not follow because landed property is minutely
divided, that farms will be so. As large properties are perfectly
compatible with small farms, so are small properties with farms
of an adequate size; and a subdivision of occupancy is not an
inevitable consequence of even undue multiplication among peasant
proprietors. As might be expected from their admirable
intelligence in things relating to their occupation, the Flemish
peasantry have long learnt this lesson. "The habit of not
dividing properties," says Dr. Rau,(23*) "and the opinion that
this is advantageous, have been so completely preserved in
Flanders, that even now, when a peasant dies leaving several
children, they do not think of dividing his patrimony, though it
be neither entailed nor settled in trust; they prefer selling it
entire, and sharing the proceeds, considering it as a jewel which
loses its value when it is divided." That the same feeling must
prevail widely even in France, is shown by the great frequency of
sales of land, amounting in ten years to a fourth part of the
whole soil of the country.. and M. Passy, in his tract "On the
Changes in the Agricultural Condition of the Department of the
Eure since the year 1800,"(24*) states other facts tending to the
same conclusion. "The example," says he, "of this department
attests that there does not exist, as some writers have imagined,
between the distribution of property and that of cultivation, a
connexion which tends invincibly to assimilate them. In no
portion of it have changes of ownership had a perceptible
influence on the size of holdings. While, in districts of small
farming, lands belonging to the same owner are ordinarily
distributed among many tenants, so neither is it uncommon, in
places where the grande culture prevails, for the same farmer to
rent the lands of several proprietors. In the plains of Vexin, in
particular, many active and rich cultivators do not content
themselves with a single farm; others add to the lands of their
principal holding, all those in the neighbourhood which they are
able to hire, and in this manner make up a total extent which in
some cases reaches or exceeds two hundred hectares" (five hundred
English acres). "The more the estates are dismembered, the more
frequent do this sort of arrangements become: and as they conduce
to the interest of all concerned, it is probable that time will
confirm them."
    "In some places," says M. de Lavergne,(25*) "in the
neighbourhood of Paris, for example, where the advantages of the
grande culture become evident, the size of farms tends to
increase, several farms are thrown together into one, and farmers
enlarge their holdings by renting parcelles from a number of
different proprietors. Elsewhere farms as well as properties of
too great extent, tend to division. Cultivation spontaneously
finds out the organization which suits it best." It is a striking
fact, stated by the same eminent writer,(26*) that the
departments which have the greatest number of small côtes
foncières, are the Nord, the Somme, the Pas de Calais, the Seine
Inférieure, the Aisne, and the Oise; all of them among the
richest and best cultivated, and the first-mentioned of them the
very richest and best cultivated, in France.
    Undue subdivision, and excessive smallness of holdings, are
undoubtedly a prevalent evil in some countries of peasant
proprietors, and particularly in parts of Germany and France. The
governments of Bavaria and Nassau have thought it necessary to
impose a legal limit to subdivision, and the Prussian Government
unsuccessfully proposed the same measures to the Estates of its
Rhenish Provinces. But I do not think it will anywhere be found
that the petite culture is the system of the peasants, and the
grande culture that of the great landlords: on the contrary,
wherever the small properties are divided among too many
proprietors, I believe it to be true that the large properties
also are parcelled out among too many farmers, and that the cause
is the same in both cases, a backward state of capital, skill,
and agricultural enterprise. There is reason to believe that the
subdivision in France is not more excessive than is accounted for
by this cause; that it is diminishing, not increasing; and that
the terror expressed in some quarters, at the progress of the
morcellement, is one of the most groundless of real or pretended
panics.(27*)
    If peasant properties have any effect in promoting
subdivision beyond the degree which corresponds to the
agricultural practices of the country, and which is customary on
its large estates, the cause must lie in one of the salutary
influences of the system; the eminent degree in which it promotes
providence on the part of those who, not being yet peasant
proprietors, hope to become so. In England, where the
agricultural labourer has no investment for his savings but the
savings bank, and no position to which he can rise by any
exercise of economy, except perhaps that of a petty shopkeeper,
with its chances of bankruptcy, there is nothing at all
resembling the intense spirit of thrift which takes possession of
one who, from being a day labourer, can raise himself by saving
to the condition of a landed proprietor. According to almost all
authorities, the real cause of the morcellement is the higher
price which can be obtained for land by selling it to the
peasantry, as an investment for their small accumulations, than
by disposing of it entire to some rich purchaser who has no
object but to live on its income, without improving it. The hope
of obtaining such an investment is the most powerful inducements,
to those who are without land, to practise the industry,
frugality, and self-restraint, on which their success in this
object of ambition is dependent.
    As the result of this enquiry into the direct operation and
indirect influences of peasant properties, I conceive it to be
established, that there is no necessary connexion between this
form of landed property and an imperfect state of the arts of
production; that it is favourable in quite as many respects as it
is unfavourable, to the most effective use of the powers of the
soil; that no other existing state of agricultural economy has so
beneficial an effect on the industry, the intelligence, the
frugality, and prudence of the population, nor tends on the whole
so much to discourage an improvident increase of their numbers;
and that no existing state, therefore, is on the whole so
favourable both to their moral and their physical welfare.
Compared with the English system of cultivation by hired labour,
it must be regarded as eminently beneficial to the labouring
class.(28*) We are not on the present occasion called upon to
compare it with the joint ownership of the land by associations
of labourers.

NOTES:

1. "Fast ubermenschliche Fleiss". Der Canton Schaffhausen (ut
supra), p. 53.

2. Supra, Book i, ch. ix, sec. 4.

3. Read the graphic description by the historian Michelet, of the
feelings of a peasant proprietor towards his land.
    "Si nous voulons connaitre la pensee intime, la passion, du
paysan de France, cela est fort aise. Promenons-nous le dimanche
dans la campagne, suivons-le. Le voila qui s'en va la-bas devant
nous. Il est deux heures; sa femme est a vepres; il est
endimanche; je reponds qu'il va voir sa maitresse.
    "Quelle maitresse? sa terre.
    "Je ne dis pas qu'il y aille tout droit. Non, il est libre ce
jour-la, il est maitre d'y aller ou de n'y pas aller. N'y va-t-il
pas assez tous les jours de la semaine? Aussi, il se detourne, il
va ailleurs, il a affaire ailleurs. Et pourtant, il y va.
    "Il est vrai qu'il passait bien pres; c'etait un occasion. Il
la regarde, mais apparemment il n'y entera pas; qu'y ferait-il?
-- Et pourtant il y entre.
    "Du moins, il est probable qu'il n'y travaillera pas; il est
endimanche; il a blouse et chemise blanches. -- Rien n'empeche
cependant d'oter quelque mauvaise herbe, de rejeter cette pierre.
Il y a bien encore cette souche qui gene, mais il n'a pas sa
pioche, ce sera pour demain.
    "Alors, il croise ses bras et s'arrete, regarde, serieux,
soucieux. Il regarde longtemps, tres-longtemps, et semble
s'oublier. A la fin, s'il se croit observe, s'il appercoit un
passant, il s'eloigne a pas lents. A trente pas encore, il
s'arrete, se retourne, et jette sur sa terre un dernier regard,
regard profond et sombre; mais pour qui sait bien voir, il est
tout passionne, ce regard, tout de coeur, plein de devotion." --
Le Peuple, par J. Michelet, 1re partie, ch. 1.

4. Essai sur l'Economie Rurale de l'Angleterre, de l'Ecosse, et
de l'Irlande, 3me ed. p. 127.

5. Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, p. 146.

6. Ibid. p. 68.

7. Notes of a Traveller, p. 46.

8. Nouveaux Principes, Book iii. ch. 3.

9. Residence in Norway, p. 18.

10. Vol. i. pp. 67-9.

11. Ibid. pp. 75-9.

12. Ibid. p. 90.

13. The Prussian minister of statistics, in a work (Der
Volkswohlstand im Preussischen Staate) which I am obliged to
quote at second hand from Mr Kay, after proving by figures the
great and progressive increase of the consumption of food and
clothing per head of the population, from which he justly infers
a corresponding increase of the productiveness of agriculture,
continues: "The division of estates has, since 1831, proceeded
more and more throughout the country. There are now many more
small independent proprietors than formerly. Yet, however many
complaints of pauperism are heard among the dependent labourers,
we never hear it complained that pauperism is increasing among
the peasant proprietors." -- Kay, i. 262-6.

14. In a communication to the Commissioners of Poor Law Enquiry,
p. 640 of their Foreign Communication, Appendix F to their First
Report.

15. Ibid. 268.

16. The following is the table (see p. 168 of the Belgian
translation of Mr Rau's large work:

                                per cent
United States   1820-30             2.92
Hungary (according to Rohrer)       2.40
England         1811-21             1.78
England         1821-31             1.60
Austria     (Rohrer)                1.30
Prussia         1816-27             1.54
Prussia         1820-30             1.37
Prussia         1821-31             1.27
Netherlands     1821-28             1.28
Scotland        1821-31             1.30
Saxony          1815-30             1.15
Baden           1820-30 (Heunisch)  1.13
Bavaria         1814-28             1.08
Naples          1814-24             0.83
France          1817-27  (Mathieu)  0.63
 and more recently Moreau de Jonnes 0.55

    But the number given by Moreau de Jonnes, he adds, is not
entitled to implicit confidence.
    The following table given by M. Quetelet (Sur l'Homme et le
Developpment de se Facultes, vol. i, ch. 7, also on the authority
of Rau, contains additional matter, and differs in some items
from the preceding, probably from the author's having taken, in
those cases, an average of different years:

                        per cent
Ireland                     2.45
Hungary                     2.40
Spain                       1.66
England                     1.65
Rhenish Prussia             1.33
Austria                     1.30
Bavaria                     1.08
Netherlands                 0.94
Naples                      0.83
France                      0.63
Sweden                      0.58
Lombardy                    0.45

    A very carefully prepared statement, by M. Legoyt, in the
Journal of Economistes for May 1847, which brings up the results
for France to the census of the preceding year 1846, is summed up
in the following table:

        According to the Census         According to the excess
of
                                            births over deaths
            percent                             percent

Sweden      0.83                                1.14
Norway      1.36                                1.30
Denmark      --                                 0.95
Russia       --                                 0.65
Austria     0.85                                0.90
Prussia     1.84                                1.18
Saxony      1.45                                0.90
Hanover      --                                 0.85
Bavaria      --                                 0.71
Wurtemburg  0.01                                1.00
Holland     0.90                                1.03
Belgium      --                                 0.76
Sardinia    1.08                                 --
Great Britain
(exclusive of Ireland)
            1.95                                1.00
France      0.68                                0.50
United States
            3.27                                 --


17. Journal des Economistes for March and May 1847.

18. M. Legoyt is of opinion that the population was understated
in 1841, and the increase between that time and 1846 consequently
overstated, and that the real increase during the whole period
was something intermediate between the last two averages, or not
much more than one in two hundred.

19. Journal des Economistes for February 1847. In the Journal for
January 1865, M. Legoyt gives some of the numbers slightly
altered, and I presume corrected. The series of percentages is
1.28, 0.31, 0.69, 0.60, 0.41, 0.68, 0.22, and 0.20. The last
census in the table that of 1861, shows a slight reaction, the
percentage, independently of the newly acquired departments,
being 0.32.

20. The following are the numbers given by M. Legoyt:
    From 1824 to 1828 annual number of births 981,914, being 1 in
32.30 of the population.
    From 1829 to 1833 annual number of births 965,444, being 1 in
34.00
    From 1834 to 1838 annual number of births 972,993, being 1 in
34.39
    From 1839 to 1843 annual number of births 970,617, being 1 in
35.27
    From 1844 to 1845 annual numbrr of births 983,573, being 1 in
35.58

    In the last two years the births, according to M. Legoyt,
were swelled by the effects of considerable immigration. "Cette
diminution des naissances." he observes, "en presence d'un
accroissement constant, quoique peu rapide, de la population
generale et des mariages, ne peut etre attribue qu'aux progres de
l'esprit d'ordre et de prevision dans les familes. C'est
d'ailleurs la consequence prevue de nos institutions civiles et
sociales, qui, en amenant chaque jour une plus grande subdivision
de la fortune territoriale et mobiliere de la France, developpent
au sein des populations les instincts de conservation et de
bien-etre."
    In four departments, among which are two of the most thriving
in Normandy, the deaths even then exceeded the births. The census
of 1856 exhibits the remarkable fact of a positive diminution in
the population of 54 out of the 86 departments. A significant
comment on the pauper-warren theory. See M. de Lavergne's
analysis of the returns.

21. "Les classes de notre population qui n'ont que leur salaire,
celles qui, par cette raison, sont les plus exposees a
l'indigence, sont aujourd'hui beaucoup mieux pourvues des objets
necessaires a la nourriture, au logement et au vetement, qu'elles
ne l'etaient au commencement du siecle.... On peut appuyer [ce
fait] du temoignage de toutes les personnes qui ont souvenir de
la premiere des epoques comparees.... S'il restait des doutes a
cet egard, on pourrait facilement les dissiper en consultant les
anciens cultivateurs et les anciens ouvriers, ainsi que nous
l'avons fait nous-memes dans diverses localites, sans rencontrer
un seul temoignage contradictoire; on peut invoquer aussi les
renseignemens recueillis a ce sujet par un observateur exact, M.
Villerme (Tableay de l'Etat Physique et Moral des Oyvriers, liv.
ii. ch. i)" From an intelligent work published in 1846,
Recherches sur les Cayses de l'Indigence, par A. Clement, pp.
84-5. The same writer speaks (p. 118) of "la hausse considerable
qui s'est manifeste depuis 1789 dans le taux du salaire de nos
cultivateurs journaliers;" and adds the following evidence of a
higher standard of habitual requirements, even in that portion of
the town population, the state of which is usually represented as
most deplorable. "Depuis quinze a vingt ans, un changement
considerable s'est manifeste dans les habitudes des ouvriers de
nos villes manufacturieres: ils depensent aujourd'hui beaucoup
plus que par le passe pour le vetement et la parure... Les
ouvriers de certaines classes, tels que les anciens canuts de
Lyon," (according to all representations, like their 
counterpart, our handloom weavers, the very worst paid class of
artizans,) "ne se montrent plus comme autrefois couverts de sales
haillons." (page 164.)
    The preceding statements were given in former editions of
this work, being the best to which I had at the time access; but
evidence, both of a more recent, and of a more minute and precise
character, will now be found in the important work of M. Leonce
de Lavergne, Economie Rurale de la France depuis 1789. According
to that pains-taking, well-informed, and most impartial enquirer,
the average daily wages of a French labourer have risen, since
the commencement of the Revolution, in the ratio of 19 to 30,
while, owing to the more constant employment, the total earnings
have increased in a still neater ratio, not short of double. The
following are the words of M. de Lavergne (2nd ed. p. 57):
    "Arthur Young evalue a dix-neuf sols le prix moyen de la
journee du travail, qui doit etre aujourd'hui d'un franc
cinquante centimes, et cette augmentation ne represente encore
qu'une partie du gain realise. Bien que la nation rurale soit
restee a peu pres la meme, l'excedant de population survenu
depuis 1789 s'etant concentre dans les villes, le nombre effectif
des journees de travail a grossi, d'abord parce que la vie
moyenne s'etant allongee, le nombre des hommes valides s'est
eleve, et ensuite parce que le travail est mieux organise, soit
par la suppression de plusieurs fetes chomees, soit par le seul
effet d'une demande plus active. En tenant compte de
l'accroissement du nombre des journees, le gain annuel de
l'ouvrier rural doit avoir double.... Cette augmentation dans le
salaire se traduit pour l'ouvrier en une augmentation au moins
correspondante de bien-etre, puisque le prix des principaux
objets necessaires a la vie a peu change, et que celui des objets
fabriques, des tissus, par exemple, a sensiblement baisse.
L'habitation est egalement devenue meilleure, sinon partout, du
moins dans la plupart de nos provinces."
    M. de Lavergne's estimate of the average amount of a day's
wages is grounded on a careful comparison, in this and all other
economical points of view, of all the different provinces of
France.

22. In his little book on the Agriculture of the Palatinate,
already cited. He says that the daily wages of labour, which
during the last years of the war were unusually high, and so
continued until 1817, afterwards sank to a lower money-rate, but
that the prices of many commodities having fallen in a still
greater proportion, the condition of the people was unequivocally
improved. The food given to farm labourers by their employers has
also neatly improved in quantity and quality. "Sie heutigen Tages
bedeutend besser ist, als vor ungefahr 40 Jahren, wo das Gesinde
weniger Fleisch und Mehlspeisen, keinen Kase zum Brote u. dgl.
erhielt." (p. 20) "Such an increase of wages" (adds the
Professor) "which must be estimated not in money, but in the
quantity of necessaries and conveniences which the labourer is
enabled to procure, is, by universal admission, a proof that the
mass of capital must have increased."  It proves not only this,
but also that the labouring population has not increased in an
equal degree; and that in this instance as well as in that of
France, the division of the land, even when excessive, has been
compatible with a strengthening of the prudential checks to
population.

23. He cites as an authority, Schwerz, Landwirthschaftliche
Mittheilungen, i. 185.

24. One of the many important papers which have appeared in the
Journal of Economistes,the organ of the principal political
economists of France, and doing great and increasing honour to
their knowledge and ability. M. Passy's essay has been reprinted
separately as a pamphlet.

25. Economie Rurale de la France, p. 455.

26. See, for facts of a similar tendency, pp. 141, 250, and other
passages of the same important treatise: which, on the other
hand, equally abounds with evidence of the mischievous effect of
subdivision when too minute, or when the nature of the soil and
of its products is not suitable to it.

27. Mr. Laing, in his latest publication, "Observations on the
Social and Political State of the European People in 1848 and
1849", a book devoted to the glorification of England, and the
disparagement of everything elsewhere which others, or even he
himself in former works, had thought worthy of praise, argues
that "although the land itself is not divided and subdivided" on
the death of the proprietor, "the value of the land is, and with
effects almost as prejudicial to social progress. The value of
each share becomes a debt or burden upon the land." Consequently
the condition of the agricultural population is retrograde; "each
generation is worse off than the preceding one, although the land
is neither less nor more divided, nor worse cultivated." And this
he gives as the explanation of the great indebtedness of the
small landed proprietors in France (pp. 97-9). If these
statements were correct, they would invalidate all which Mr.
Laing affirmed so positively in other writings, and repeats in
this, respecting the peculiar efficacy of the possession of land
in preventing over-population. But he is entirely mistaken as to
the matter of fact. In the only country of which he speaks from
actual residence, Norway, he does not pretend that the condition
of the peasant proprietors is deteriorating. The facts already
cited prove that in respect to Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland,
the assertion is equally wide of the mark; and what has been
shown respecting the slow increase of population in France,
demonstrates that if the condition of the French peasantry was
deteriorating, it could not be from the cause supposed by Mr.
Laing. The truth I believe to be that in every country without
exception, in which peasant properties prevail, the condition of
the people is improving, the produce of the land and even its
fertility increasing, and from the larger surplus which remains
after feeding the agricultural classes, the towns are augmenting
both in population and in the well-being of their inhabitants. On
this question, as well as on that of the morcellement, so far as
regards France, additional facts and observations, brought up to
a later date, will [52, 57 observations will] be found in the
Appendix.

28. French history strikingly confirms these conclusions. Three
times during the course of ages the peasantry have been
purchasers of land; and these times immediately preceded the
three principal eras of French agricultural prosperity.
    "Aux temps les plus mauvais," says the historian Michelet,
(Le Peyple, lre partie, ch. 1) "aux moments de pauvrete
universelle, ou le riche meme est pauvre et vend par force, alors
le pauvre se trouve en etat d'acheter; nul acquereur ne se
presentant, le paysan en guenilles arrive avec sa piece d'or, et
il acquiert un bout de terre. Ces moments de desastre ou le
paysan a pu acquerir la terre a bon marche, ont toujours ete
suivis d'un elan subit de fecondite qu'on ne s'expliquait pas.
Vers 1500, par example, quand la France epuisee par Louis XI
semble achever sa ruine en Italie, la noblesse qui part est
obligee de vendre; la terre, passant a de nouvelles mains,
refleurit tout-a-coup; on travaille, on batit. Ce beau moment
(dans le style de l'histoire monarchique) s'est appele le bon
Louis XII.
    "Il dure peu, malheureusement. La terre est a peine remise en
bon etat, le fisc fond dessus; les guerres de religion arrivent,
qui semblent raser tout jusqu'au sol, miseres horribles, famines
atroces ou les meres mangeaient leurs enfants. Qui croirait que
le pays se releve de la? Eh bien, la guerre finit a peine, de ce
champ ravage, de cette chaumiere encore noire et brulee, sort
l'Epargne du paysan. Il achete; en dix ans, la France a change de
face; en vingt ou trente, tous les biens ont double, triple de
valeur. Ce moment encore baptise d'un nom royal, s'appelle le bon
Henri IV et le grand Richelieu."
    Of the third era it is needless again to speak: it was that
of the Revolution. 
    Whoever would study the reverse of the picture, may compare
these historic periods, characterized by the dismemberment of
large and the construction of small properties, with the
wide-spread national suffering which accompanied, and the
permanent deterioration of the condition of the labouring classes
which followed, the "clearing" away of small yeomen to make room
for large grazing farms, which was the grand economical event of
English history during the sixteenth century.

